New Labour 
Code For
 New India
Biggest Labour Reforms in
 Independent India.

Long due and much awaited Labour reforms have been 
passed by the Parliament. The reforms will ensure well-
being of our industrious workers and give a boost to 
economic growth. They are also shining examples of 
‘Minimum Government, Maximum Governance.' The new 
Labour codes universalise minimum wages and timely 
payment of wages. They give priority to occupational 
safety of the workers. These reforms will contribute to 
a better working environment, which will accelerate the 
pace of economic growth. These Labour reforms will ensure 
‘Ease of Doing Business.’ These are futuristic legislations 
which will empower enterprises by reducing compliance, 
red-tapism and ‘Inspector Raj.’ These reforms also seek to 
harness the power of technology for the betterment of 
the workers and industry both.” 
(In a tweet on the occasion of passing of Labour Reforms Bill on 23.09.2020 in the Parliament)“
Prime Minister Narendra Modi

1. Introduction .............................................................................
2. Only discussion for 18 years ...........................................
3. Satyamev Jayate To Shramev Jayate.....................
4. 4 Labour Codes and freedom from the web of 
legislation ..................................................................................
5. Right To Minimum Wages for everyone .................
6. Social Security for everyone....................................
7. The provision of right to security for workers  
in all situations.............................................................
8. Towards end to disputes ...................................................01
02
04
07 
10
12
15
19Chapters

1
New Labour Code For New IndiaIntroduction Chapter 1
The empowerment of workers is necessary for 
an empowered, prosperous and Aatmanirbhar 
India.  Even after 73 years of Independence,    
approximately 90% of workers work in the 
unorganized sector that do not have access to all 
the social securities. The total number of workers, 
comprising of organized and unorganized sectors, 
is  more than 50 crores. It is for the first time 
that any Government has cared for the workers 
in both organized and unorganized sectors and 
their families.
Earlier, the working class was entangled in web 
of multiple labour legislations. The Central 
Government has taken a revolutionary step in 
the right direction to provide them freedom in 
true sense. 
For this, the Central Government has taken 
historical step of codifying 29 laws into 4 Codes, 
so that workers can get security along with 
respect, health and other welfare measures with 
ease.

2
New Labour Code For New IndiaThere are more than 50 crore workers in the 
organized and unorganized sector of the country. 
A majority of these workers i.e. around 90 percent, 
are in the unorganized sector. Through these four 
Labour Codes, it has been ensured that all these 
workers will get the benefit of Labour Laws.  Now 
all workers of the organized and unorganized 
sector will get the minimum wages and a large 
section of workers in unorganized sector would 
also get social security. 
The Second National Commission of Labour had 
submitted its report in 2002 which said that 
there was multiplicity of Labour Laws in India and 
therefore, recommended that at the Central level 
multiple Labour Laws should be codified in 4 or 
5 Labour Codes. While discussions were held on 
it, however, no serious initiative was taken in this 
direction during the time period from 2004 to Only discussion since 
18 yearsChapter 2

3
New Labour Code For New India2014. Labour Reforms also remained untouched 
during the economic reforms carried out in 1991. 
The brainstorming on Labour Codes were fast-
tracked when the GST, as One Nation One 
Tax, was made applicable in the  country with 
consensus and with the strong will of the Hon’ble 
Prime Minister Modi Ji to take tough decisions 
for “Sabka Sath Sabka Vikas aur Sabka Vishwas ”. 
By taking forward this progressive thinking, the 
reforms in Labour Laws were also speeded up. 
Extensive discussions were held before initiation 
of Labour Reforms by Ministry of Labour and 
Employment. Initially, as a part of Government's 
pre-legislative consultative policy, the Ministry 
uploaded all the draft Labour Codes on its website 
for stakeholders and public consultation. During 
2015 to 2019, the Ministry organized 9 tripartite 
discussions in which all the Central Trade Unions, 
Employers’ Associations and representatives 
of State Governments were invited to give 
their opinions/suggestions on Labour reforms. 
All the four Bills were also examined by the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee which gave 
its recommendations to the Government.

4
New Labour Code For New IndiaSatyamev Jayate to 
Shramev Jayate 
The far reaching vision of the existing Government  
for workers became clear in October 2014 itself. 
The moment Prime Minister Modi took over the 
reign of the Government, the Shramev Jayate 
Scheme was started.
Giving importance to the workers when the Prime 
Minister had started “Shramev Jayate” on 16th 
October, 2014 at that moment, while terming the 
workers as “Nation Builders”, he had said that 
the power of “Shramev Jayate” for growth of the 
country was equal to that of “Satyamev Jayate”. 
Workers were given the benefit of portability 
through Universal Account Number (UAN) so as 
to enable them to withdraw their provident fund 
securely from anywhere. In addition, the system 
of 'inspector raj' was removed by making the role 
of inspector to that of advisor and facilitator for 
workers. Chapter 3

5
New Labour Code For New IndiaIn addition, through Shram Suvidha Portal, the 
industry was provided ease in return filing. At 
that time itself the Government made it clear 
that if attitude is respectful then workers become 
“Shram Yogi, Rashtra Yogi and Nation Builders”. 
The Prime Minister made it clear even then that 
issues of the workers should now be seen from  
the perspective of workers. 
Through continuous reforms and by taking care 
of the interest of workers, the Modi Government 
started the initiative of providing social security 
to old age workers of unorganized sector. For 
this,  the Pradhan Mantri Shram Yogi Man Dhan 
Yojana was started, in which provision was made 
for pension benefit of Rs 3,000 per month after 
reaching the age of 60.
The Central Government also wanted to know 
the correct status of Labour Laws made for the 
workers, whether these are really beneficial or 
not and whether there is any Labour Law which 
is not allowing the workers to make progress.

6
New Labour Code For New India• For transparency and accountability, the usage 
of IT-enabled system for inspection has been 
made mandatory. 
• The ceiling limit of gratuity has been increased 
from Rs 10 Lakhs to Rs 20 Lakhs on 29.03.2018.
• On 16.02.2017, Payment of Wages Act enabled 
payment of wages to employees by cheque or 
crediting it to their bank account.
• Maternity Benefit Amendment Act, 2017, which 
came into effect on 01.04.2017, increased the 
paid maternity leave from 12 weeks to 26 
weeks.Labour Reforms undertaken since 2014

7
New Labour Code For New India4 Labour Codes and 
Freedom from the Web 
of Legislation
Many provisions of Labour Laws trace their origin 
to the time of the British Raj. However, with 
changing times, many of them either became 
ineffective or did not have any contemporary  
relevance. Rather than protecting the interests 
of workers, these provisions became difficulties 
for them. 
 
The web of legislations was such that workers 
had to fill four forms to claim a single benefit. 
Therefore, the present Government has repealed 
the non-useful Labour Laws. Now 29 Labour Laws 
have been codified into 4 Labour Codes. Chapter 4

8
New Labour Code For New IndiaNew 4 Codes are beneficial for all
For ensuring workers’ right to minimum wages, 
the Central Government has amalgamated 4 laws 
in the Wage Code, 9 laws in the Social Security 
Code, 13 laws in the The Occupational Safety, 
Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020 and 3 
laws in the Industrial Relations Code.
For this, by getting the Bills passed by the 
Parliament, the Central Government has made a 
headway towards changing the standard of living 
of workers in a fundamental manner. This will 
have positive and far reaching effect on workers 
and nation building.
These Labour Reforms will enhance Ease of Doing 
Business in the country. Employment creation 
and output of workers will also get enhanced. 
The benefits of these four Labour Codes will 
be available to workers of both organized and 
unorganized sector. Now, Employees’ Provident 
Fund (EPF), Employees’ Pension Scheme (EPS) 
and coverage of all types of medical benefit 
under Employees’ Insurance will be available to 
all workers.

9
New Labour Code For New India
(New Labour Code for New India)
It will be necessary for 
the employers to provide 
secure working condition at 
workplace for women  
workers.
(New Labour Code for New India)A   Labour Tribunal will 
institutionalize the vibrant 
mechanism for speedy 
disposal of cases, because 
delay in justice equals to 
injustice.

10
New Labour Code For New IndiaRight to Minimum 
Wages for everyone
Four Labour Laws have been amalgamated into 
the Minimum Wages Code. Due to this, for the 
first time, all the workers have got the Right to 
Minimum Wages.
Labour Code (Wage Code) – 2019: Workers will 
get benefitted
• After 73 years of independence, work is being 
done to provide wage security, social security 
and health security to 50 crore workers, 
covering organized and unorganized sectors.
• The guarantee of minimum wages is available 
to 50 crore workers of organized and 
unorganized sectors.
• Review of minimum wages in every 5 years.
• Guarantee of timely payment of wages to all 
workers.Chapter 5

11
New Labour Code For New India• Equal remuneration to male and female 
workers.
• For the first time, around 40 crore workers of 
unorganized sector in the country have got 
this right.
• To remove regional disparity in minimum 
wages the provision of floor wage has been 
introduced.
• The determination of minimum wages has 
been made easy. It will be based on criteria 
such as skill level and geographical area.
• From 28.08.2017 Payment of Wages Act has 
increased the wage ceiling from Rs. 18000 to 
Rs. 24000.
(New Labour Code for New India)To replace inspector raj system, 
inspector will be made inspector 
cum facilitator and random web 
based inspection system will also 
be started.

12
New Labour Code For New IndiaSocial Security for 
everyone
To ensure security for all workers, the Central 
Government has amalgamated 9 Labour Laws 
into the Social Security Code in order to secure 
the right of workers for insurance, pension, 
gratuity, maternity benefit etc.
Through this Code, a comprehensive legal 
framework for Social Security has to be created 
so that workers can receive social security 
completely.
Under this, in a step wise manner, a system 
would be institutionalized for the contributions 
received from employer and worker.
The Government can fund the contribution of 
workers from disadvantaged section.Chapter 6

13
New Labour Code For New India• Through a small contribution, benefit of free 
treatment is available under hospitals and 
dispensaries of ESIC.
• The doors of ESIC will now be opened for the 
workers of all sectors along with the workers 
of the unorganized sector.
• Expansion of ESIC hospitals, dispensaries and 
branches upto district level. This facility   to 
be increased from 566 districts to all the 740 
districts of the country.
• Even if a single worker is engaged in hazardous 
work, he would be given ESIC benefit.
• Opportunity to join ESIC for platform and gig 
workers engaged in new technology.
• Plantation workers to get benefit of ESIC.
• Institutions working in hazardous area to be 
compulsorily registered with ESIC.
Expansion of Social Security
• Benefit of pension scheme (EPFO) to all workers 
of organized, unorganized and self-employed 
sectors.Social Security Code, 2020

14
New Labour Code For New India• Creation of social security fund for providing 
comprehensive social security to the 
unorganized sector.
• Requirement of minimum service has been 
removed for payment of gratuity in case of 
fixed term employees.
• Employees engaged on fixed term to get 
same social security benefit as permanent 
employees. 
• Creating a national database of workers of 
unorganized sector through registration on 
Portal.
• Employers employing more than 20 workers 
to mandatorily report vacancies online.
• A Universal Account Number (UAN) for ESIC, 
EPFO and Unorganised Sector workers.
• Aadhaar based Universal Account Number 
(UAN) to ensure seamless portability.

15
New Labour Code For New IndiaRight of security 
to workers in all  
situations
For providing better and safe environment along 
with occupational health and safety to workers 
at the work place, 13 existing Labour Laws have 
been subsumed in the Occupational, Safety, 
Health and Working Conditions Code, 2020. 
In this Code, the security of interests of workers 
engaged in factories, mines, plantations, motor 
transport sector, bidi and cigar workers, contract 
and migrant workers has been ensured.    
OSH Code (Occupational, Safety, Health and 
Working Conditions Code) - 2020
• Various provisions in the OSH Code will ease 
the lives of the Inter-State Migrant Workers.
• Anomalies of the Inter-State Migrant Workers 
Act, 1979 have been comprehensively Chapter 7

16
New Labour Code For New Indiaaddressed in the OSH Code.  Earlier only workers 
appointed by a contractor were recognized as 
Inter-State Migrant Workers. However, under 
the new provisions of the Code, workers can 
be Aatmanirbhar as they can now register 
themselves as Inter-State Migrant Workers 
on the national portal. By this provision, 
the worker would get a legal identity which 
would enable them to get benefits of all social 
security schemes. 
• A provision has been made for employers to 
provide travelling allowance annually to an 
Inter-State Migrant Worker for undertaking a 
to-and-fro journey to his native place.
• Providing of appointment letters to the 
workers has been made mandatory.
• Mandatory, free annual health check-up of the 
workers to be provided by the employers.
• For a worker engaged in building and other 
construction work in one State and moving to 
another State, benefit from the Building and 
other Construction Workers’ Cess fund will be 
provided.
• Under the “One Nation - One Ration Card”, an 

17 New Labour Code For New IndiaInter-State Migrant Worker would get ration 
facility in the State he is working in and the 
remaining members of his family would be 
able to avail of the ration facility in the State 
where they reside. 
• Mandatory helpline facility in every State for 
resolution of Inter-State Migrant Workers’ 
grievances.
• National database to be created for the Inter-
State Migrant Workers.
• Instead of 240 days, now if a worker has worked 
180 days, he shall be entitled for one-day leave 
for every 20 days of work done.
• Women empowerment through the Labour 
Codes
• Right to women workers to work in all types of 
establishments.
• Women have been given the right to work 
at night with their consent and it has also 
been ensured that the employer would make 
adequate arrangements to provide safety and 
facilities to women workers at night.

18 New Labour Code For New India
New Labour Codes will ensure 
Minimum Wages and Social Security 
to 50 crore workers engaged in 
unorganized & organized Sector 
and self employed.
(New Labour Code for New India)• Maternity Benefit Act was amended in 2017 to 
increase the paid Maternity leave for women 
workers from 12 to 26 weeks and ensure 
mandatory crèche facility in all establishments 
having 50 or more workers. 

19 New Labour Code For New IndiaTowards end to 
disputes
By amalgamating 3 Labour Laws into the 
Industrial Relations Code the Central Government 
has taken steps for safeguarding the interests of 
Trade Unions as well as the workers. In this Code, 
all possible steps have been taken for industrial 
units and workers so that disputes do not arise 
in future 
Industrial Relations (IR) Code, 2020
• In case of job loss, a worker will get benefit 
under the Atal Bimit Vyakti Kalyan Yojna. 
• Under the Atal Bimit Vyakti Kalyan Yojna, a 
worker of organized sector who loses his job 
gets financial aid from the Government. This 
is a type of unemployment allowance, the 
benefit of which is admissible to the workers 
covered under the ESI Scheme.  
• At the time of retrenchment a worker would Chapter 8

20 New Labour Code For New Indiabe provided 15 days’ wages for re-skilling. The 
wages would be credited directly into the bank 
account of the worker so as to enable him to 
learn new skills.
• Faster justice to the workers through the 
Tribunal.
• Workers disputes to be resolved within a year 
in the Tribunal.
• Industrial Tribunals to have 2 members to 
facilitate faster disposal of cases.
• In industrial establishments, a Trade Union 
having 51 per cent votes shall be recognised as 
the sole negotiating union   which can make 
agreements with employers.
• In industrial establishments in which no trade 
union gets 51 per cent votes, a negotiating 
council of trade unions shall be constituted for 
making agreements with employer.  

21 New Labour Code For New IndiaWe need to come out of the mindset that 
industry and labour are always in conflict 
with each other. Why not have a mechanism 
where both benefit equally? Since labour is 
a concurrent subject, the law gives flexibility 
to state governments to modify the codes 
further as per their unique situation and 
requirements. The right to strike has not 
been curtailed at all. In fact, trade unions 
have been conferred with a new right, 
enabling them to get statutory recognition.
We have made the employer-employee 
relation more systematic and symmetrical. 
The provision of notice period gives an 
opportunity for amicable settlement of 
any grievance between employees and 
employers.”
- Prime Minister Narendra Modi“

22 New Labour Code For New IndiaWelfare of Inter-State Migrant Workers
The Government had been working for a long 
time for increasing benefits of the Inter-State 
Migrant Workers. Initiatives have been taken in 
this direction to strengthen laws for the Inter-
State Migrant Workers.
For Inter-State Migrant Workers and the poor, 
the Central Government has accelerated many 
schemes like Garib Kalyan, delivery of free food 
grains to the homes, etc.  
Benefits of Codification 
• Single Registration; Single License; Single 
Statement; Minimum Forms
• Common definitions
• Reduction of Committees 
• Web-based surprise inspection 
• Use of technology – Electronic registration 
and licensing.
• Reduction of compliance cost and disputes 

23 New Labour Code For New India
Until there are family sentiments among 
workers and employers, the feeling of 
belongingness does not arise. If the 
employer thinks that he feeds someone and 
if the Labour thinks his sweat is running in 
employers’ world, then I do not think that 
the business will work smoothly. However, 
if family sentiments exist, if the sorrow of 
a worker ruins nights of the employer and 
a worker does not sleep in the night,  or 
some loss for the factory, with the arising 
of such family sentiments, the journey 
of development cannot be stopped by 
anyone.”“
- Prime Minister Narendra Modi

24 New Labour Code For New India
Simple and accountable 
system will simplify the 
processes.  One Registration 
-  one License, single return for 
all the Codes. 
(New Labour Code for New India)
A Social Security fund to 
be created for 40 crore 
unorganized workers including 
the gig and platform workers. 
This would help in extending 
comprehensive Social security 
coverage. 
(New Labour Code for New India)

25 New Labour Code For New IndiaThese reforms are very pro-worker. They 
are now entitled to all benefits and social 
security even if hired for fixed term. The 
labour reforms will help create significant 
employment while also protecting the 
worker by ensuring minimum wage reforms, 
provision for social security for workers in the 
informal sector, and minimising government 
interference. It will ensure timely payment 
of wages and give priority to occupational 
safety of the workers, thus contributing to a 
better working environment. In the last few 
weeks, we have finished what we had set out 
to do. The 44 central labour laws with over 
1,200 sections have been assimilated into 
just four codes. There will now be just one 
registration, one assessment and one return 
filing. Along with easier compliance, this will 
lead to a stable regime for businesses to 
invest and create a win-win situation for the 
employee and the employer.” “
- Prime Minister Narendra Modi

26 New Labour Code For New India
श्रमिकों क े  कल्याण क े  लिए श्रि संहितया
• मजद ूर और मजबूत बना, सुरक्ा का विश्ास 
बढा
• खुल गये हैं प्रगवत क े  द्ार, नारी को सम्ान 
और समान अधिकार
• सामाजजक सुरक्ा का ह ुआ विस्ार, असंगठित 
क्ेत्र क े  श्रवमकों को भी वमला उनका अधिकार
• श्रवमकों की खुशहाली का एक ही मन्त्र 
जिाबदेह और सरल तंत्र
• सामाजजक सुरक्ा सबका हक, श्रम की जय 
जयकार हो

27 New Labour Code For New India
श्रमिकों क े  कल्याण क े  लिए श्रि संहितया
• सरल हो गई प्रक्रिया, सफल ह ुए काम  
• अब अस्ायी और प्ेटफॉम्म श्रवमकों क े  ठहत 
“सामाजजक सुरक्ा योजना” से हैं सुरजक्त 
• असंगठित कामगार पाए हर अधिकार
• मेहनत का सम्ान, अ धिकार एक समान एिं 
श्रम ही स्ाधभमान हो
• पुनककोशजलकरन क े  द्ारा कामगार क्फर हुआ 
हुनर क े  साथ तैयार

28 New Labour Code For New IndiaAchievement
£ Universalization of Social Security _.1 
l Employees' Provident Fund Organisation ) 
8 { _ ...... ,... ....... Sd>tm, ) 
fib) { -··-....... ) -• (..!!'_p~oJM&· Ot9oslt Uric.tdlnlwllnc e Schttne 
'¥3'9·W·'·'·'rmmmnrJ 
( <l<M.S.molf ~ O,..oiNdW.rbrsJ 
f-v~Go¥1.~ ( Appi~blt onk~ indlll~ [ Exttooloo uodot SS Codo j 
{ NPS ) (MindatarrtMMOt elhafi20Worb~ FPF4 F fOflns!Nn20Wort:trS ) 
1 • I 
I [; 
£ Universalization of Social Security _.1 
( l Employees' State Insurance Corporation J 
Extension of Applicability 
r (Xis6og 1 
(011••iwd Worbrs} 
Pre$tMiy in 566 Districts 
MaOO,toryfo r more tbln 
10Worbrs 
3.50 or. E0'4llol'eo• 
13.50 cr. Membtrs ) '"' i ~ ExteOOed to &!th' lndia·7410 Ostrlet$ ) 
Vo untary Covtragt: 'I ao) rttrnttrt of 
, omploy,.s&""l'lo!trsbobwiOwarktrs 
! ~-' SCMmtlor tJnot'g1nittd Worktrs, ;,; ) 
1 \ workers ttc . 
' J Ho W:Oifers lim& for ~iZWIIOUS or Uft ) 
~ \ lhruttt'lil; Occupations . i ~ Option to Plantation5 owners } 

29 New Labour Code For New India

30 New Labour Code For New India

31 New Labour Code For New India

32 New Labour Code For New India

33
New Labour Code For New IndiaMinistry of Information and Broadcasting
Government of India


