Everybody 
Should Fal 
Universal Law Publishing Co. 


4 Comprehensive Encyclopaedia 
covering all Important Acts, Rules, 
Regulations, Schemes & Forms 
4th Edn. 2008 (In 2 vols.) 
with FREE 
Case Law Referencer 2000-2007 
and FREE CD of 
Labour & Industrial Law 
Workin ) 
(_OMPENSATION 
Dismissal ¢ 
DischargeC> 
Retrenchment 
Transt 
Employees under 
Labour Laws Obligation of : 
Employers Under 
Labour Laws | 
Pe mplover’s 
Rights under 
= Lahour Laws .m 
Wat 


LABOUR 
LAWS Everybod 
Should eee 
Classic Law Books 
a from 
CGiniversal 
with best compliments from 
UNIVERSAL LAW PUBLISHING CO. PVT. LTD. 
DELHI 
www.unilawbooks.com 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR 
i Labour & Industrial Law (In 2 volumes) 
(Covering all important Acts/Rules/Regulations /Schemes/ 
Forms on Labour and Industrial Laws), 4th Edition. 
Labour Problems and Remedies—A ready referencer to handle 
day-to-day labour problems, 8th Edition. 
Labour Laws—Everybody should know, 5th Edition. 
Checklist—Obligations of Employers under Labour Laws, 
5th Edition. 
Model Appointment Letters and Service Rules, 4th Edition. 
Employers Rights Under Labour Laws, 3rd Edition. 
Transfer of Employees under Labour Laws, 3rd Edition. 
Digest of Labour Cases (Case Law Finder), 5th Edition. 
Law Relating to Leave, Holidays and Absenteeism in 
Industries, 8th Edition. 
Law Relating to Disciplinary Proceedings in Industries, 
5th Edition. 
. Law Relating to Resignation and VRS, 2nd Edition. 
Law Relating to Dismissal, Discharge and Retrenchment 
under Labour Laws, 2nd Edition. 
Practical Guide to Labour Management—A to Z from Selection 
to Separation, 6th Edition. 
Practical Guide to Industrial Disputes Act, 3rd Edition. 
. Practical Guide to Employees’ Provident Funds Act, Rules 
and Schemes, 6th Edition. 
Practical Guide to Employees State Insurance Act, Rules and 
Regulations, 7th Edition. 
Practical Guide to Payment of Gratuity Act & Rules, 5th Edition. 
- Practical Guide to Payment of Bonus Act and Rules. 
- Practical Guide to Workmen’s Compensation Act & Rules, 4th Edition. 
. Practical Guide to Factories Act, 3rd Edition. 
. Practical Guide to Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act & Rules, 3rd Edition. 
. Practical Guide to Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act & Rules, 2nd Edition. 
- Practical Guide to Payment of Wages Act & Rules 2nd Edn. - An Exhaustive Guide—Delhi School Education Act & Rules, 8th Edition. 
. An Exhaustive Guide—Delhi Shops and Establishments Act & Rules, 10th Edition. 
. Make Your Will Yourself with Model Drafts, 3rd Edition. 


~ LABOUR 
LAWS Everybod 
Should ol 
Fifth Edition 
H.L. KUMAR Advocate, Supreme Court of India 
Editor, Labour Law Reporter 
GAURAV KUMAR 
MBA, LL.M., Advocate 
Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd. 


First Edition 1995% 
Second Edition 2003 
Third Edition 2005 
Fourth Edition 2007 
Fifth Edition 2008 
ISBN : 978-81-7534-680-2 
© Publishers 
No part of this publication can be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, without prior permission of the Publishers. 
Published by 
UNIVERSAL LAW PUBLISHING CO. PVT. LTD. 
C-FF-1A, Dilkhush Industrial Estate, 
(Opp. Hans Cinema, Azadpur) G.T. Karnal Road, 
Delhi-110 033 
Tel : 011-27438103, 27215334, 42381334 
Fax : 011-27458529 
E-mail (For sales inquiries) : sales@unilawbooks.com 
E-mail (For editorial inquiries) : edit@unilawbooks.com 
Website : www.unilawbooks.com 
Recommended citation: Labour Laws—Everybody Should Know, H.L. Kumar, 
5th Edn. (New Delhi: Universal Law Publishing Co. Pvt. Ltd., 2008) 
Although every care has been taken to avoid errors or omissions in this 
publication, inspite of this, inadvertently, errors may creep in. The publication 
is being sold on the condition and understanding that information given herein 
is merely for guidance and reference. It must not be taken as having authority 
of, or binding in any way on, the authors, editors, publishers and sellers who 
do not owe any responsibility for any damage or loss to any person, who may 
or may not be a purchaser of this publication on account of any action taken on 
the basis of this publication. For authoritative text information, please contact 
the department concerned or refer to the Government publication or the gazette 
notification. The publishers shall be obliged if any mistake, error or discrepancy 
is brought to their notice for carrying out correction in the next edition. In case 
of binding mistake, misprint or for missing pages etc., the publishers liability is 
limited to replacement within one month of the purchase by similar edition/ 
reprint. All disputes are subject to Delhi Jurisdiction only. 
Computer Typeset at Aesthetic & Printed at Taj Press, (Noida) 


Preface to Fifth Edition 
This book seeks to serve as a reliable guide and companion to 
both employers and employees as well. Although efforts are 
required for a drastic change in the labour laws, yet it will still 
take quite some time to get those proposals translated into 
reality. With more emphasis on workers acquiring skill and 
education, the old concept of ‘master-servant’ relationship is fast 
shaping into the ‘employer and employee relationship. That is 
why the need to know the rudimentary rules and rubrics of law 
for both, as all these are necessary. Much has been changing in 
labour laws, both in nature of litigation before the courts and 
Industrial Tribunals, in its practice besides amendments and 
procedure hence the contents of this edition have undergone 
significant changes, both by way of additions and deletions. 
The earlier editions of the book were more focused and centric 
towards employer but in this time it has been ensured that 
employees also get benefited. The basic tenet and underpinning 
philosophy of labour laws is to protect the interests of the 
employees by saving them from exploitation and harassment on 
the one hand and providing enough leverage and stick of good 
governance to employers so as to have conductive work culture 
on the other hand. The cordial and congenial relationship can be 
had only when both the limbs of organization have better 
understanding in the light of. the limits of their rights, 
responsibilities and duties. 
The archaic labour laws and slow peace of legislation have 
proved woefully ineffective, prolix and repetitive, bogged in 
lengthy procedures and delayed justice. It should be made 
simple and easily accessible, quick in decision and immediate 
Vv 


vi Preface to Fifth Edition 
relief. It is also unsuited to the tempo of modern life where speed 
and efficiency are of utmost importance. 
The provisions of labour laws are generally very complex but 
in this book, it has been tried to interpret and project those laws 
with the help of case laws as simple as possible. I am sure that 
the book will cater to the needs managers, trade union leaders, 
employers, employees, the practitioners, consultants of the laws 
and HRM executives. 
I must record here my sincere appreciation and thanks to Mr. 
M.R. Gera, former Director (Projects), All India Management 
Association who has to the credit of organizing many seminars 
all over India and has immensely helped me with his vast, varied 
and rich experiences. I must admit that I have learnt a lot during 
the seminars and by interacting with the thousands of 
participants at different places all over the country. My 
assignment at the seminars, generally pertained to interactive 
sessions for clarifications to the queries as raised by the 
participants. Such ‘questions-answers sessions’ have been 
provided an opportunity for self learning and were helpful to 
incorporate the practical aspects in this small but useful book 
wherein all the important Acts for day-to-day working are 
explained in this book to make it informative. 
H.L. KUMAR 


CONTENTS 
Preface to Fifth Edition Vv 
Table of Cases Xxi 
1. The Apprentices Act, 1961 
The object 2 
Standard of Education for Apprentices 3 
Period of apprenticeship training 3 
Essential ingredients of contract of apprenticeship 4 
Registration of contract of apprenticeship 5 
Apprentice is not a ‘workman’ or governed by labour laws 5 
Apprentice’s claim for regular post 5 
Obligations of an apprentice to accept employment fromemployer 6 
Obligations of the apprentices 6 
Obligations of employers towards apprentices 6 
Apprentices and bonus 7. 
Apprentices and Coverage under Employees’ Provident Funds act 7. 
Apprentices and Coverage under Employees’ State Insurance Act 7 
Hours of work 7 
Leave 7 
Violation of the act by an employer—consequences of 9 
Termination of apprenticeship contract 9 
Termination of contract—consequences of 10 
Stipend to the apprentices 10 
~ 2. The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 
The object 14 
Act to have overriding effect 14 
Agreement, custom, etc., To be void 15 
Extinguishment of liability, to repay bonded debt 15 
Property of bonded labourer to be freed from mortgage, etc. 15 
Freed bonded labourer not to be evicted from homestead, etc. 15 
Creditor not to accept payment against extinguished debt 16 
Punishment for contravention of above provisions 16 
Punishment for contravention of other provisions of the act . 16 
/ 
cae 4, The Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 
The object 18 
Applicability of the Act 18 
Establishment 19 
Vii 


Vili Labour Laws 
Appropriate government 
Workman 
Registration for principal employer 
Licence for contractor 
Prohibition of contract labour 
Effect of non-registration 
Absorption of contract labour 
No automatic absorption of contract labour on 
prohibition/abolition 
Appropriate government and not courts can order for 
abolition of contract labour 
Payment of wages to contract labour 
Liabilities of the contractor and principal employer 
Penalties and procedures 
Other labour acts applicable to contractors 
establishments /contract labour 
1. Factories Act, 1948 
2. The Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 
The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 
The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
7. The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 
Maintenance of prescribed registers, records and 
submission of returns 
Guidelines for drafting agreement between Principal 
Employer and the Contractor 
4. The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 1986 So ey 
Maintenance of register 
Penalties 
Display of notice 
5. The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 
The object 
Applicability of the Act 
Rate of contributions 
Payment of contribution 
Levy of damages when the payment of contribution is delayed Recovery of damages for default in payment of any contributions 19 
19 
20 
20 
aI 
22 
fa 
ae 
23 
23 
24 
24 
24 
24 
2 
25 
25 
25 
26 
* 26 
26 
30 
33 
34 
34 
36 
36 
37 
37 
37 
38 


Contents 
Wages etc., Of the employees cannot be reduced 
Payment of contribution also for the employees of a contractor 
Declaration by person taking up employment 
Preparation of contribution cards 
Preparation of contribution cards for employees’ pension scheme 
Duties of employers under employees’ provident funds scheme 
Employer to furnish particulars of ownership 
Duties of the employer under employees’ pension scheme 
Mode of payment of contributions—submission of returns/forms43 
To make entry of contributions in the contribution card 
Renewal of contribution cards 
Submission of contribution cards to the commissioner 
Custody of contribution cards 
Inspection of cards by members 
Production of cards and records for inspection by the 
commissioner or inspector 
Obligation of employers pertaining to returns and to 
carry out directions 
Advances/ withdrawals 
Scale of benefits payable under EDLI scheme 
Scales of Benefits under Employees’ Deposit Linked 
Insurance Scheme, 1976 
Withdrawal of Advances and the Conditions Thereto 
Punishment for contravention of certain provisions of the Act 
Offences by companies 
Enhanced punishment in certain cases after previous conviction 
5A. The Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 
Applicability 
Membership eligibility 
Funding of the Scheme 
Benefit package 
Special provisions made in the scheme to facilitate benefit 
availability /delivery for seasonal/casual employees 
Salient Features 
Early Pension on Cessation of Employment 
Scheme Certificate 
Widow Pension 
Widow Pension after Commencement of Monthly Pension 
Option for Return of Capital 
Summary of Benefits to existing members 
Withdrawal Benefit 
Payment of Pension through Banks eS NS ix 
38 
S 
39 
40 
40 
4] 
41 
42 
44 
44 
45 
45 
45 
45 
46 46 
47 
47 
48 
50A 
50B 
50C 
50D 
50D 
50E 
50E 
50F 
50F 
50-I 
50-1 
50-] 
50L 
50L 
50L 
50L 
50M 


x Labour Laws 
Withdrawal Benefit (As per Para 14 of the Scheme) 50M 
Factor for Computation of Past Service Benefit under the 
Ceased Family Pension Scheme for Existing Members 
on Exit from the Employment (As per Para 14 of the Scheme) 50N 
Equivalent Widow Pension (As per Paragraph 16 of the Scheme) = 50N 
6. The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 
The object 52 
Contributions 53 
Registration of factories or establishments 53 
Duty to complete declaration form 53 
Submission of declaration form and return in form 3 54 
Procedure for allotment of insurance number 54 
Procedure for registration of families 54 
Registration of changes in the family sc) 
Duty to assist the corporation 55 
Identity cards se) 
Issue of certificate of employment 55 
Contingencies in which contribution cards be sent to regional office 55 
Duty to issue certificate of contribution rate on leaving employment 56 
Duty to pay interest on contribution due but not paid in time 56 
Duty to maintain register of employees . 56 
Mode for payment of contribution when employment 
is by two or more employers 57 
Scheme by joint employers a 
Reckoning of wages of an employee in case of two or 
more employers 37 
Duty to furnish particulars in respect of abstention of an 
insured person 57 
Duty to maintain accident book — 58 
Duty to report accident to the nearest local office 38 
Duty to arrange first-aid 59 Employer to furnish further particulars of accident 59 Duty to report death if it is by employment injury 59 Duty to maintain inspection book 939 Bar to punitive action during sickness period 60 Forms and returns 62 
Punishment for false statement 64 Punishment for failure to pay contributions, etc. 64 Enhanced punishment in certain cases after previous conviction 65 Power to recover damages 65 Benefits to insured persons under ESI Scheme 66 Table of Standard Benefits 


Contents xi 
Exemption from Payment of ESI Contributions to lower income 
employees 66A 
Benefits, Contributions Conditions 66B 
Other Benefits 66E 
Availability of Benefits—When Contributions are not paid 66E 
Deposit of ESI Contribution does not depend on 
disbursement of wages 66E 
I. Aids to ESI record keeping 66E 
Il. Registers/Files to be maintained by Employers 66F 
Desirable Action Plan 66F 
7. The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 
Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 
The object 68 
Unless the central government otherwise directs by 
notification in the official gazette in this behalf, this Act 
shall also not apply in relation to 69 
Employer’s obligations to notify vacancies 70 
Offences and penalties 70 
Employment exchanges to which vacancies are to be notified 70 
Form and manner of notification of vacancies 70 
Time limit for the notification of vacancies a 
Submission of return 72 
8. The Employers’ Liability Act, 1938 
The object 74 
Important words and phrases 74 
Defence of common employment barred in certain cases 74 
Prohibition for contracting of service he) 
9, The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 
The object 78 
Important words and phrases 78 
No discrimination to be made while recruiting men 
and women workers 79 
Duty of employers to maintain registers 80 
Penalties 80 
Offences by companies 81 
10. The Factories Act, 1948 
The object 84 
Applicability 84 
Obligations of an employer 85 


xii Labour Laws 
Chapter I (Preliminary) 
Chapter II (The Inspecting Staff) 
Chapter III (Health) 
Chapter IV (Safety) 
Chapter IVA (Provisions Relating to Hazardous Processes) 
Chapter V (Welfare) 
Chapter VI (Working Hours of Adult) 
Chapter VII (Employment of Young Persons) 
Chapter VIII (Annual Leave with Wages) 
Chapter IX (Special Provisions) 
Registers, notices, returns and reports under the Factories Act, 1948 96 
Registers required to be maintained under the Factories Act, 1948 
Acts to be done or maintained 
Chapter X (Penalties and Procedures) 
Chapter XI (Supplemental) 
_1. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
The object | 
Important definitions 
~ Authorities under the act for investigation and settlement 
of industrial disputes 
Works committee 
Board of conciliation 
Adjudication of industrial disputes 
Industrial tribunals 
Powers of the labour court /industrial tribunal to modify the 
punishment of dismissal or discharge 
Notice of change in conditions of service 
« Power of the government to refer a dispute for adjudication 
Reference of disputes to arbitration 
yHlegal strikes Xv 
Prohibition of strikes and lock-outs 
General prohibition of strikes and lock-outs 
* Illegal strikes and lock-outs  f ‘ 
*Penalty for illegal strikes and lock-outs K7/ * 102 
103 
rd 107 
108 
108 
108 
109 
109 
110 
-— 
113 3 
113 
114 
115 
115 


Contents 
Penalty for instigation etc. 
Government can prohibit the continuation of 
strikes and lock-outs 
Lay-off, right of an employer and its duration 
Law governing lay-off 
Employer's duties in connection with a lay-off 
Quantum of lay-off compensation 
Retrenchment and compensation 
Conditions precedent to retrenchment 
Employer’s obligations and duties in retrenching employees 
Transfer of an undertaking 
Closure and Compensation 
Concept of closure 
Closure—A fundamental right 
Closure of part of undertaking 
Unfair labour practices 
Compensation to workmen in case of closing 
down of undertakings 
Sixty days’ notice to be given of intention to close 
down certain undertaking 
Controls on retrenchment, closure and lay-off 
Special provisions of chapter VB relating to lay-off, 
retrenchment and closure of certain establishments 
Application for permission to government 
Miscellaneous Matters 
Conditions of service, etc., To remain unchanged under 
certain circumstances during pendency of proceedings 
Maintenance of peace during pendency of proceedings 
Procedure for changing conditions 
Workmen concerned in the dispute 
Application without prejudice tenable 
Application when not necessary 
Scope of inquiry when permission application is 
made to the tribunal 
Permission does not bar raising of industrial dispute 
regarding action 
Effect of permission xiii 
115 
116 
117 
117 
117 
118 
120 
120 
121 
122 
122 
123 
123 
123 
124 
125 
126 
126 
131 
132 
134 
134 
135 
135 
es 
136 
136 
137 


ie Labour Laws 
Refusal of permission 137 
Effect of refusal 137 
Protected workman 137 
Prior approval of action not contemplated 138 
Provisions do not apply to discharge simpliciter 138 
Action must be taken in accordance with the standing orders 138 
Paying of one month’s wages is a mandatory condition: an offer 
of payment is sufficient compliance with the provisions 139 
Stage of application 139 
Manner of fulfilling the conditions simultaneously 139 
Proceedings are independent of reference 139 
Superannuation does not attract section 33(2) 140 
Withdrawal of application 140 
Scope of inquiry under section 33(2) in approval proceedings 140 
Complaints regarding contravention of section 33 140 
Who can make complaint ? 141 
Inquiry is co-extensive with inquiry under section 10 of the Act 141 
Tribunal has power to grant interim relief 141 
Special provision for adjudication as to whether conditions 
of service, etc., changed during pendency of proceedings 141 
Power to transfer certain proceedings 142 
Recovery of money due from an employer 143 
Penalties’ 145 
i 
~~ 11A. Industrial Employment (Standing Order) Act, 1946 
What are Standing Orders 146B 
Submission for certification of draft standing orders 146C 
Procedure for certification of Standing Orders 146C 
Date of operation of Standing Orders 146D 
Register of Standing Orders 146D 
Posting of Standing Orders 146E 
Duration and modification of Standing Orders 146E 
Temporary application of model Standing Orders 146F 
Certified standing orders become statutory conditions 
of service 146F 
Inconsistence between contract of employment and certified 
standing orders — Latter will prevail 146G 
Penalties and procedure — section 13 146G 


Contents 
12. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 
The object 
Applicability of the Act 
Important terms and expressions 
Prohibition of work or employment by women during 
certain period 
Entitlement to payment of maternity benefit 
Continuance of payment of maternity benefit in certain cases 
Payment of maternity benefit in certain cases 
Notice of claim for maternity benefit and payment thereof 
Payment of maternity benefit in case of death of a woman 
Payment of medical bonus 
Leave for miscarriage, medical termination of pregnancy 
and tubectomy operation 
Leave for illness arising out of pregnancy, delivery, 
premature birth of child, or miscarriage 
Nursing breaks 
Prohibition for dismissal during absence due to pregnancy 
Wages not to be deducted 
Forfeiture of maternity benefit 
Exhibition of abstracts of the act 
Maintenance of muster-rolls by establishment of mines and circus 
Submission of returns by mines and circus 
Penalty for contravention of act by employer 
Penalty for obstructing inspector 
13. The Mines Act, 1952 
The object 
Meaning of a mine 
Hours of work, rest interval, weekly off and overtime, etc. 
Leave with wages 
Duties and responsibilities of owners, agents and managers 
Health and safety of workers 
(a) Drinking water 
(b) Conservanc 
(c) Medical appliances XV 
148 
148 
149 
151 
151 
1$3 
153 
£53 
154 
154 
154 
£59. 
155 
155 
156 
156 
156 
156 
157 
157; 
158 
160 
160 
161 
162 
163 
164 
164 
165 
165 


xvi Labour Laws 
Notice of accidents 
Prohibition of employment of persons below eighteen 
years of age, etc. 
Conditions for employment of women 
Registers of persons employed 
To paste abstracts from the Act, regulations, etc. 
Penalties 
(a) Obstruction 
(b) Falsification of records 
(c) Omission to furnish plans 
(d) Contravention of provisions regarding employment 
of workman 
(e) Penalty for employment of persons below eighteen 
years of age 
(f) Failure to appoint manager 
(g) Special provision for contravention of certain regulations 
(h) Special provision for contravention of orders under 
section 22 
(i) Special provision for contravention of law with 
dangerous results » 
(j) General provision for disobedience of orders 
(k) Enhanced penalty after previous conviction 
14. The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
The object 
Minimum rates of wages 
Wages must be paid in cash 
Manner and procedure of fixing and revising minimum 
rates of wages 
Hours of work and holidays 
Extra wages for overtime 
Rest day 
Employer’s obligations 
Registers, records, notices, abstract and returns 
Scheduled Employment 
Penalties & Punishment for Offences 166 
167 
167 
168 
169 
169. 
169 
170 
170 
170 
171 
171 
171 
171 
171 
172 
i73 
176 
177 
177 
178 
178 
179 
179 
179 
182 
183 
183 


Contents 
15. The Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 
The object 
Applicability of the Act 
Motor transport undertaking—Scope of 
Motor transport worker 
Welfare facilities 
Medical and first-aid facilities 
Hours of work, rest intervals and spreadover 
Weekly rest day 
Notice of hours of work 
Extra wages for overtime 
Employment of young persons 
Annual leave with wages 
Wages for the leave period 
Penalties 
Obligations of employers 
16. The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 
Eligibility for bonus and definition of an employee 
Infancy benefit for new establishments 
Eligibility for bonus 
Extent and application of the act 
Applicability of act to public undertakings 
Exempted establishments 
Accounting year 
Allocable surplus 
Available surplus 
Accuracy of balance sheet and profit and loss account 
Dearness allowance 
Bonus on commission 
Forfeiture of bonus 
Wages for bonus 
Time limit for Payment of Bonus 
Working days and bonus 
17. The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 
Actually worked — meaning of 
Attachment of gratuity — payable to legal heirs 
‘Average Monthly Wages’ — calculation 
Continuous service — meaning of 
Duty of an employer to pay gratuity 
Forfeiture of gratuity xvii 
186 
186 
186 
187 
188 
188 
189 
189 
190 
190 
190 
Lot 
191 
192 
192 
194 
195 
195 
thee) 
196 
197, 
198 
198 
199 
201 
202 
202 
202 
202 
202 
203 
207 
208 
208 
208 
210 
211 


XVili Labour Laws 
Time limit for claiming gratuity 
Mode for payment of gratuity 
Display of notice 
18. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 
Object of the Act 
Applicability of the Act 
Wages 
Timely payment of wages 
Responsibility for payment of wages 
Deductions from wages 
Levy of fines 
Deduction for damage and loss 
Claim 
Employer's obligations 
Penalties for contravention of the Provisions of the Act 
19. The Sales Promotion Employees 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 
The object 
Important words and phrases under the Act 
Issue of appointment letter 
Maintenance of register 
Penalty 
Offences by ras 
~~ 20. The Trade Unions Act, 1926 
Important definitions 
Registration of a trade union 
Application for registration 
Provisions to be contained in the rules of a trade union 
Registration and its certificate 
Cancellation of registration 
Registered office 
Criminal conspiracy in trade disputes 
Immunity from civil suit in certain cases 
Returns 
Failure to submit returns 
Supplying false information regarding trade unions 
Cognizance of offences 
Prescribed form a for application for registration of trade union 
Schedule I 211 
211 
212 
214 
215 
215 
216 
216 
217 
218 
218 
218 
218 
220 
222 
223 
223 
224 
224 
224 
229 
229 
230 
231 
232 
232 
232 
233 
233 
233 
234 
234 
235 
235 
236 


Contents 
21. The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 
The object 
Important definitions and clarifications 
Liability of an employer for compensation 
Amount of compensation and method of calculation 
Compensation to be paid when due and penalty for default 
Method of calculating wages 
Distribution of compensation 
Power of commissioner to require from employer, 
statement regarding fatal accident 
Report of fatal accidents and serious bodily injuries 
Return as to compensation - 
Contracting out 
Power of commissioner to require further deposit in case 
of fatal accident 
Registration of agreements 
Effect of failure to register agreement 
Penalties 
22. Other Related Matters 
Hours of work 
Hours of work—Rest, overtime and spread-over under 
Shops & Establishments Act of the states 
Leave and holidays 
Distinction between leave and holidays 
Festival and national holidays 
Leave admissible to workers under the Factories Act 
Transfer of employees 
Procedure for disciplinary action 
Misconduct 
Charge-sheet 
Service of charge-sheet 
Power to suspend pending enquiry 
Procedure to conduct a domestic enquiry 
Report of the enquiry officer xix 
238 
238 
241 
244 
248 
249 
250 
252 
252 
253 
253 
253 
254 
255 
255 
258 
259 
260 
261 
261 
261 
267 
268 
269 
273 
2/7 
2// 
278 
279 


XX Labour Laws 
Punishment 
Point to be considered before inflicting punishment 
Resignation of an employee and legal implications 
Law relating to retirement of an employee 
Circumstances when there is no age of retirement either 
in the appointment letter or certified standing orders 
Principles for fixing the age of retirement 
Retiral benefits to employees in private employment 
Subject Index 279 
281 
282 
283 
284 
285 
286 
293 


TABLE OF CASES 
All India Voltas & Volkart Employees Federation v. Voltas Ltd., 
1973 Lab IC 645 
Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board v. Rajappa, 
1978 Lab & 1C 467: AIR 1978 SC 548: 36 FLR 266: 
1978 (1) LLJ 349 
Chalthan Vibhag Sahakari Khand Udyog, 
Chalthan v. Govt. Labour Officer, 1981 Lab IC 292 
Eicher Good Earth Ltd. v. Rajendra Kumar Soni, 
1993 LLR 524 (Raj HC) 
M.C. Mehta v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1996 SCC 756 
Mohan Kumar v. Dy. Labour Commissioner, 1991 (62) FLR 903 
Motor Industries Company Ltd. v. Popat Murlidhar Patil, 
1997 I LLN 749: 1997 (2) LLJ 1206 (Bom HC) 
Oil and Natural Gas Commission v. Sham Kumar Sehgal, 
1995 LLR 618 (Guj HC) 
P.K. Mohan Kumar v. Deputy Labour Commissioner, 
1996 LLR 765 (Ker HC) 
S. Krishnamurthy v. Presiding Officer, Central Govt. 
Labour Court Madras, 1986 I LLJ 133 (SC) 
Scindia Steam Navigation Company Ltd. v. Scindia Employees’ 
Union, 1983 II LLN 63 
Steel Authority of India Ltd. v. National Union, Water 
Front Workers, 2001 LLR 961 (SC) 
Sudhir Chandra Sarkar v. Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd., 
1984 (3) SCC 369 
T.C. Panuswamy v. Labour Court, Coimbatore, 1970 (2) LLJ 507 
Western India Match Co. Ltd. v. Workmen, AIR 1973 SC 2650: 
(27) FLR 228 
Workmen represented by Secretary v. Management of Reptekose 
Brett & Co. Ltd., 1992 LLR 1 
Xxi 203 
103 
203 
146G 
33 
203 
203 
203 
203 
203 
203 
23 
146F 
203 
146G 
a4 




QL APPRENTICES ACT, 
CHECKLIST 
Object of the Act 
of trades and occupations. 
Industry 
Industry means any industry, or business or in 
which any trade, occupation or 
subject/field in engineering or 
>, technology or any vocational 
course may be specified as a 
designated trade. 
Sec. 2(k) 
Contract of Apprenticeship 
To contain such terms and 
conditions as may be agreed to by 
the apprentice, or his guardian (in 
case he is a minor) and employers. Promotion of new manpower at skills. 
Improvement/refinement of old skills through 
theoretical and practical training in number Apprenticeship Advisor 
Central Apprenticeship 
Advisor - when appointed 
by Central Goverment. 
Sec. 2(b) Applicability of the Act 
Areas and industries as 
notified by the Central 
Government. 
Sec. 1 
Qualification for being trained as an Apprentice 
A person cannot be an apprentice in any designated trade 
unless ; 
¢ He is not less than 14 years of age; 
¢ He satisfies such standard of education 
and physical fitness as 
may be prescribed. 
Sec. 3 
Period of 
Apprenticeship 
Training to be 
determined by the 
National Council Conditions for Novation of 
contract of Apprenticeship 
* There exists an apprenticeship 
contract. 
¢ The employer is unable to fulfil his 
obligation. 
¢ The approval of the Apprenticeship 
Advisor is obtained. 
Termination of 
Apprenticeship 
On the expiry of the period of 
apprenticeship training. 
On the application by either of the 
parties to the contract to the 
Apprenticeship Advisor. 
Sec.6 
Payment to Apprentices 
The employer to pay such stipend at 
a rate of not less than the prescribed 
minimum rate as may be specified. 
Obligations of Apprentice 
* To learn his trade conscientiously, diligently. 
* To attend practical and instructional classes regularly. 
* Tocarry out all lawful orders. 
* Tocarry out his contractual obligations. 
Health safety & Welfare measures for Apprentices. 
As per Factories Act or Mines Act as the case may be when 
undergoing training. 
Hours of Work 
* 42 to 48 in a week while on theoretical training. 
* 42 in a week while on basic training. 
* 42 to 45 in a week in second year of training. 
* As per other workers (in the third year). 
* Not allowed to work between 10 PM to 4 AM unless approved by 
Apprenticeship Advisor. 
Leave and Holidays 
* Casual leave for the maximum period of 12 days in a year. 
* Medical leave for the maximum period of 15 days and the 
accumulated leave upto 40 days in a year 
* Extraordinary leave upto a maximum period of 10 days in a year. 
Sec. 15 ° Agreement must be 
registered with the 
Apprenticeship Advisor. 
Number of Apprentices in 
Designated Trade 
To be determined by the 
Central Government after 
consulting the Central 
Apprenticeship Council Obligations of 
employers 
* To provide the 
apprentice with the 
training in his trade. 
¢ To ensure that a 
person duly qualified is 
placed in charge of the 
training of the 
apprentice. . 
* To carry out contractual 
obligations. Sec. 5 
Sec. 11 
Sec. 8 
Employer’s liability to pay 
compensation for injury 
As per provisions of Workmen's 
Compensation Act. 
Sec. 16 
Offences & Punishment 
Imprisonment of a term upto 6 months 
or with fine when employer (i) engages 
as an apprentice a person who is not 
qualified for being so engaged or 
(ii) fails to carry out the terms and 
conditions of a contract of 
apprenticeship, or (iii) contravenes the 
provisions of the Act relating to the 
number of apprentices which he is 
required to engage under those 
rus provisions. 
Secs. 30 & 31 
WN CU 
3 ie 7 


1. The Apprentices Act, 
1961 
——__—___——- 
THE OBJECT 
The primary object with which the Apprentices Act, 1961 
was passed was to meet the increasing demand for skilled 
craftsmen in the development of the country. It was intended 
by the Government to utilise facilities available for training 
apprentices and to ensure their training in accordance with 
planned programme. 
The Apprentices Act amongst others has two important 
objectives, eg., promotion of new manpower skills and 
improvement and refinement of old skills through theoretical 
and practical training in number of trades and occupations. It 
is now a statutory obligation on the part of every employer 
covered under the Act to train a prescribed number of persons. 
The Act envisages to regulate and control the training of 
apprentices in trade and to supplement the availability of the 
technical persons for the industry. 
The Act as amended in 1973 and 1986 defines the technician 
(vocational) as apprentice who holds or is undergoing training 
in order that he may hold a certificate in vocational course 
involving two years of study after completion of the secondary 
stage of school education recognised by the All India Council 
and undergoes apprenticeship training in any such subject field 
2 


The Apprentices Act, 1961 3 
in any vocation course as may be prescribed. The Act provides 
an important instrument for sharpening the capability, 
ingenuity, resourcefulness and skill of the workers and through 
this eventually helps to enrich their life style. 
In exercise of powers conferred by section 37 of the Act, the 
Apprenticeship Rules have been amended and published in 
Gazette of India (Dated 1-8-1992, Part II, Section 3(i) at page 
1405). 
STANDARD OF EDUCATION FOR APPRENTICES 
A person shall be eligible for being engaged as a trade 
apprentice if he _ satisfies the minimum _ educational 
qualifications as specified in Schedule I. 
A person shall be eligible for being engaged as a graduate or 
technician or technician vocational apprentice if he satisfies 
one of the minimum educational qualifications specified in 
Schedule IA: 
Provided that:— 
no Engineering Graduate or Diploma holder or 
Vocational Certificate holder who had training or job 
experience for a period of one year or more, after the 
attainment of these qualifications shall be eligible for 
being engaged as an apprentice under the Act; 
no Sandwich Course Student shall be eligible for 
being engaged as an apprentice under the Act after 
passing the final examination of the technical 
institution wherein such student is undergoing the 
course, unless so approved by the Regional Central 
Apprenticeship Advisers; 
A person who has been a Graduate or Technician or 
Technician (Vocational) apprentice under the Act and 
in whose case the contract of apprenticeship was 
terminated for any reason whatsoever shall not be 
eligible for being engaged as an apprentice again under 
the Act without the prior approval of the 
Apprenticeship Adviser. 
PERIOD OF APPRENTICESHIP TRAINING 
The period of apprenticeship training, which shall be 
specified in the contract of apprenticeship, shall be as 
follows:— 
(i) In the case of trade apprentices who, having undergone 
institutional training in a school or other institution 
recognized by the National Council, have passed the 
trade tests conducted by the Council, the period of 


(i1) 
(iii) 
(iv) Labour Laws 
apprenticeship training shall be such as may be 
determined by the Council or by an _ institution 
recognized by that Council; 
In the case of trade apprentices who, having undergone 
institutional training in a school or other institution 
affiliated to or recognized by a Board or State Council 
of Technical Education or any other authority which 
the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, have passed the 
trade tests conducted by that Board or State Council or 
Authority, the period of apprenticeship training shall 
be such as may be prescribed; 
In the case of other trade apprentices, the period of 
apprenticeship training shall be such as may be 
prescribed; 
In the case of graduate or technician apprentices, the 
period of apprenticeship training shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 
ESSENTIAL INGREDIENTS OF CONTRACT OF APPRENTICESHIP 
(i) 
(11) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) No person shall be engaged as an apprentice to undergo 
apprenticeship training in a designated trade unless 
such person or, if he is a minor, his guardian has 
entered into a contract of apprenticeship with the 
employer; 
The apprenticeship training shall be deemed to have 
commenced on the date on which the contract of 
apprenticeship has been entered into as per clause (i); 
Every contract of apprenticeship may contain such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed to by the parties 
to the contract. Provided that no such term or condition 
shall be inconsistent with any provision of Apprentices 
Act or any rule made thereunder; 
Every contract of apprenticeship as entered into shall 
be sent by the employer within such period as may be 
prescribed to Apprenticeship Adviser for registration; 
The Apprenticeship Adviser shall not register a 
contract of apprenticeship unless he is satisfied that the 
person described as an apprentice in the contract is- 
qualified under this Act for being engaged as 
apprentice to undergo apprenticeship training in the 
designated trade specified in the contract; 
Where the Central Government after contacting the Central Apprenticeship Council, makes any rule varying the condition of apprenticeship training of any 


The Apprentices Act, 1961 5 
category of apprentices undergoing such training, then 
the terms and conditions of every contract of 
apprenticeship relating to that category of apprentices 
and immediately before the making of such rule shall 
be deemed to have been modified accordingly. 
It is not provided by the Apprentices Act that 
registration of a contract of apprenticeship is necessary 
as the intention of the legislation was to include only 
those persons in the category of apprentices who have 
entered into a contract of apprenticeship which has 
been registered. However, according to Rule 6 of the 
amended Apprenticeship Rules, 1991 as published in 
Gazette of India (Dated 1-8-1992, Part II, Section 3(i) 
page 1405) it is provided that every employer shall 
send to the Apprenticeship Adviser a contract of 
apprenticeship for registration within three months of 
the date on which it was signed. 
REGISTRATION OF CONTRACT OF APPRENTICESHIP 
It is not provided by the Apprentices Act that registration of 
a contract of apprenticeship is necessary as the intention of the 
legislation was to include only those persons in the category of 
apprentices who have entered into a contract of apprenticeship 
which has been registered. The word ‘registered’ would have 
used before the word ‘contract’. It, therefore, becomes clear that 
it is the existing contract of apprenticeship that is required to 
be registered and not that such contract becomes a contract of 
apprenticeship only after it is registered as required by sub- 
section (4) of section 4 of the Act. Therefore, the registration of 
the contract of apprenticeship is not a necessary ingredient for 
answering the description of the expression ‘apprentice’ 
occurring in section 2(aa) of the Act. 
APPRENTICE IS NOT A ‘WORKMAN’ OR GOVERNED BY 
LABOUR LAWS 
Section 18 of the Apprentices Act, 1961 provides that an 
apprentice shall not be regarded as a worker if he is undergoing 
apprenticeship training in a designated trade in an 
establishment and that an apprentice as defined in the Act 
cannot claim any privilege as workman under any law 
including Industrial Disputes Act. The provisions of section 25F 
of the Industrial Disputes Act are not attracted in this respect. 
APPRENTICE’S CLAIM FOR REGULAR POST 
Under section 22(1) of the Act, it is not obligatory on the part 
of the employer to offer any employment to an apprentice who 


6 Labour Laws 
has completed his period of apprenticeship training in his 
establishment nor it is obligatory on the part of the apprentice 
to accept the employment under the employer. 
OBLIGATIONS OF AN APPRENTICE TO ACCEPT EMPLOYMENT 
FROM EMPLOYER 
Since it is not obligatory on the part of the employer to offer 
any employment to any apprentice who has completed his 
period of apprenticeship similarly an apprentice is also not 
bound to accept the employment under the employer. 
OBLIGATIONS OF THE APPRENTICE 
Every trade apprentice undergoing apprenticeship training 
shall have the following obligations, namely:— 
(i) to learn his trade conscientiously and diligently and 
endeavour to qualify himself as a skilled craftsman 
before the expiry of the period of training; 
(ii) to attend practical and instructional classes regularly; 
(iii) to carry out all lawful orders of his employer and 
superiors in the establishment; and 
(iv) to carry out his obligations under the contract of 
apprenticeship. 
Every graduate or technician apprentice undergoing 
apprenticeship training shall have the following obligations, 
namely:— 
(i) to leam his subject field in engineering or technology 
conscientiously and diligently at his place of training; 
(ii) to attend the practical and instructional classes 
regularly; 
(iii) to carry out all lawful orders of his employer and 
supericrs in the establishment; and 
(iv) to carry out his obligations under the contract of 
apprenticeship which shall include the maintenance of , 
such records of his work as may be prescribed. 
OBLIGATIONS OF EMPLOYERS TOWARDS APPRENTICES 
Without prejudice to the other provisions of the Act, every 
employer shall have the following obligations in relation to an 
apprentice, namely:— 
(a) to provide the apprentice with the training in his trade 
in accordance with the provisions of the Act, and the 
rules made thereunder; 
(b) if the employer is not himself qualified in the trade, to ensure that a person who possesses. the prescribed qualifications is placed in charge of the training of the apprentice; and 


The Apprentices Act, 1961 7 
(c) to carry out his obligations under the contract of 
apprenticeship. 
APPRENTICES AND BONUS 
By the very definition of ‘employee’, the apprentices are not 
eligible for bonus as per section 2(13) of the Payment of Bonus 
Act. 
APPRENTICES AND COVERAGE UNDER EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT 
FUNDS ACT 
An apprentice is not an ‘employee’ as defined by the 
Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act. 
The amended provisions of Provident Fund and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act vide amendment by Act 33 of 1988 defining 
‘employees’ provides that it will include any person engaged as 
an apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged under 
Apprentices Act, 1961, or under the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Act, 1946. 
APPRENTICES AND COVERAGE UNDER EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSUR- 
ANCE ACT 
The amending Act 29 of Employees’ State Insurance Act, 
1989 while defining an ‘employee’ under the ESI Act has 
provided that it does not include any person engaged as an 
apprentice under the Apprentices Act, 1961 or under the 
Standing Orders of the establishment. 
HOURS OF WORK 
The daily hours of work of an apprentice shall not be more 
than 8 hours per day and weekly hours not less than 40 hours 
but not more than 45 hours. A short term apprentice may 
however be engaged to work upto a maximum limit of 48 hours 
per week. The hours of training of the apprentice should not be 
between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. except with the prior approval of 
the Apprenticeship Adviser. An apprentice is entitled to leave 
in accordance with the Leave Rules which exist for the workers 
of that establishment provided every apprentice must put in a 
minimum attendance of 264 days in a year of training, 1/6th of 
which should be devoted to related instructions and 220 days to 
practical training. 
LEAVE 
An apprentice is entitled to the following leaves:— 
(a) Casual leave : 
(i) Casual leave shall be admissible for a maximum 
period of twelve days in a year; 
(ii) Any holidays intervening during the period of 
casual leave shall not be counted for purpose of the 
limit of twelve days; 


8 Labour Laws 
(iii) Casual leave not utilised during any year shall stand 
lapsed at the end of the year; 
(iv) Casual leave shall not be combined with medical 
leave. If casual leave is preceded or followed by 
medical leave, the entire leave taken shall be treated 
either as medical or casual leave provided that it shall 
not be allowed to exceed the maximum period 
prescribed in respect of medical or casual leave, as the 
case may be; 
(v) Except in case of extreme urgency applications for 
such leave shall be made to the appropriate authority 
and sanction obtained prior to the availing of leave. 
(b) Medical leave : 
(i) Medical leave up to fifteen days for each year of 
training may be granted to the apprentice who is 
unable to attend duty owing to illness. The unused 
leaves shall be allowed to accumulate up to a 
maximum of forty days; 
(ii) Any holidays intervening during the period of 
medical leave shall be treated as medical leave and 
accounted for in the limits prescribed under clause (i); 
(iii) The employer may call upon the apprentice to 
produce a medical certificate from a registered 
medical practitioner in support of his medical leave. 
A medical certificate shall, however, be necessary, if 
the leave exceeds six days; 
(iv) It shall be open to the employer to arrange a special 
medical examination of an apprentice if he has 
reason to believe that the apprentice is not really ill or 
the illness is not of such a nature as to prevent his 
attendance. 
(c) Extraordinary leave : 
Extraordinary leave up to a maximum of ten days in a year may 
be granted to the apprentice, after he has exhausted the entire 
casual and medical leave, if the employer is satisfied with 
grounds on which the leave is applied for. 


The Apprentices Act, 1961 9 
VIOLATION OF THE ACT BY AN EMPLOYER—CONSEQUENCES OF 
1. The Apprentices Act provides that if any employer 
(a) engages as an apprentice a person who is not qualified for 
being so engaged; or (b) fails to carry out the terms and conditions 
of a contract of apprenticeship; or (c) contravenes the provisions of 
the Act relating to the number of apprentices which he is required 
to engage under those provisions, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with 
fine or with both. 
2. If any employer or any other person (a) required to furnish 
any information or return, refuses or neglects to furnish such 
information or return, or, furnishes or causes to be furnished any 
information or return which is false and which he either knows or 
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, or refuses to 
answer, or gives a false answer to any question necessary for 
obtaining any information required to be furnished by him; or 
(b) refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the Central or the State 
Apprenticeship Adviser or such other person, not below the rank 
of an Assistant Apprenticeship Adviser, as may be authorised by 
the Central or the State Apprenticeship Adviser in writing in this 
behalf, any reasonable facility for making any entry, inspection, 
examination or inquiry authorised by or under this Act; or 
(c) requires an apprentice to work over-time without the approval 
of the Apprenticeship Adviser; or (d) employs an apprentice on 
any work which is not connected with his training; or (e) makes 
payment to an apprentice on the basis of piece-work; or (f) requires 
an apprentice to take part in any output bonus or incentive 
scheme, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months or with fine or with both. 
TERMINATION OF APPRENTICESHIP CONTRACT 
(i) The contract of apprenticeship shall terminate on the 
expiry of the period of apprenticeship training; 
(ii) Either party to a contract of apprenticeship may make an 
application to the Apprenticeship Adviser for the 
termination of the contract, and when such application is 
made, the party shall send by post a copy thereof to the 
other party to the contract; 
(iii) After considering the contents of the application and the 
objections, if any, filed by the other party, the 


10 Labour Laws 
Apprenticeship Adviser may, by order in writing, 
terminate the contract, if he is satisfied that the parties 
to the contract or any of them have or has failed to 
carry out the terms and conditions of the contract and 
it is desirable in the interests of the parties or any of 
them to terminate the same. 
TERMINATION OF CONTRACT—CONSEQUENCES OF 
Where the contract of apprenticeship is terminated through 
failure on the part of any employer in Pate e out the terms 
and conditions thereof, such employer shall be liable to pay the 
apprentice compensation of an amount equivalent to his three 
months’ last drawn stipend; and when the said termination is 
due to failure on the part of an apprentice in the above manner 
then a training cost of an amount equivalent to his three 
months’ last drawn stipend shall be made recoverable from 
such apprentice or from his guardian in case he is minor. 
STIPEND TO THE APPRENTICES 
The rates of stipend for the apprentices are revised from time 
to time by the authorities and as such for rates of stipend for 
different rag te be asked from the Apprenticeship Adviser 
: pane tate, wherein the factory or the establishment is 
ocated. 
EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGE, SPONSORING NOT NECESSARY 
When the petitioner had _ successfully completed his 
apprenticeship training, he is eligible to be considered for any 
future appointment, without being sponsored by any 
employment exchange. 
HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE OF APPRENTICES 
When the apprentices are undergoing training in a factory, 
the provisions of Chapters III, IV and 0 of the Factories Act, 
1948, shall apply in relation to health, safety and welfare of the 
apprentices, as if they are workers within the meaning of the 
Factories Act and when the apprentices are undergoing 
training in a mine, the provisions of Chapter V of the Mines 
Act, 1952 shall vey in relation to health and safety of the apprentices as if they were persons employed in the mine. 
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 
Any disagreement or dispute between an employer and an apprentice arising out of the contract of apprenticeship shall be referred to Apprenticeship adviser for aed lan: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the said Authority, may within 30 days from the date of communication to him of such decision, 
prefer an appeal against such decision to the Apprenticeship 
Council and such appeal shall be heard and determined by a Committee of that Council appointed for the purpose. The decision of the Committee and subject only to such decision, the 
decision of Apprenticeship Adviser, shall be final. 


The Apprentices Act, 1961 11 
The penalties can roughly be summarised as follows:— 
Action /Omission 
Engaging as an 
apprentice a person 
who is not qualified 
for being so engaged; 
(ii). Failure to carry out 
terms and conditions of 
apprenticeship contract; 
(iii) Contravention of the 
Act relating to number 
of apprentices which 
he is required to engage. 
Refusal to furnish 
any information or 
return; 
(ii) Furnishing false return; 
(iii) Refusal to answer or 
giving false information; 
(iv) Refusing to extend 
‘ reasonable facility to the 
competent Authorities 
under the Act for making 
any entry, inspection, 
examination or inquiry; 
(v) Requiring an apprentice 
to work overtime 
without approval of the 
Apprenticeship Adviser; 
(vi) Employing an apprentice 
on work not connected 
with his training; 
(vii) Making payment to an 
apprentice on the basis 
of piece rate work; 
(viii) Requiring an apprentice 
to take part in any output 
Contravening the provisions of 
is provided. bonus or incentive scheme. 
the Act for which no punishment PENALTY 
Imprison- | Fine 
ment upto 
Not 
ee specified 
but can be 
imposed 
Not 
ene specified 
but can be 
imposed 
No S. 


r ee 


BONDED LABOUR SYSTEM 
( ABOLITION } ACT, 1976 CHECKLIST 
Bonded labourer - Who is? 
A labourer who incurs, or has, or is 
presumed to have, incurred a bonded Abolition of bonded 
labour system 
Object of the Act 
* The bonded labour 
system shall stand 
abolished and every 
bonded labourer shall 
stand free and discharged 
from any obligation to 
render any bonded 
labour. 
¢ No person shall- 
¢ make any advance 
under the bonded 
labour system or, 
* compel any person to 
render any bonded 
labour or other form of 
forced labour. An Act to provide for 
the abolition of bonded 
labour system witha 
view to prevent the 
economic and physical 
exploitation of the 
weaker sections of the 
people and for matters 
connected therewth or 
incidental thereto. Sec. 2(f) 
Liability to Repay Bonded debt to Stand Extinguished 
¢ No suit or proceedings shall lie in Civil Court or 
other authorities. 
* No decree will be valid or executable. 
* Property belonging to bonded labourer shall be 
restored. Sec.4 | 
Property of Bonded 
Labour to 
be freed from Mortgage 
Mortgagee will restore the 
property and if delayed will 
be liable for mesne profit. 
Sec. 7 Creditor not to accept 
payment against 
extinguished debt 2 
Sec.9 f Freed Bonded Labourer not to be evicted 
from Homestead 
* Which he was occupying either 
homestead or residential premises. 
* The Executive Magistrate shall get the 
possession restored. Vigilance Committee 
To be constituted by every State Government 
by a Notification 
Offence f Punishment 
; ? (by KA Imprisonment upto 3 years and with y SI La 
Acceptance of payment of extinguished 
debt fine. | 
Compelling any person to render bonded Imprisonment upto 3 years and also with fine 
labour upto Rs.2,000. 
For advancement of Bonded Debt Imprisonment upto 3 years and also with fine 
upto Rs.2000. 
Extracted bonded labour under Bonded Imprisonment 3 years and also with fine upto 
Labour System Rs.2,000 payable to bonded labour @Rs.5 for 
each day of bonded labour out of fine collected. Sec. 
Sec. 9(2) 
Sec. 17 
Imprisonment upto one year or fine upto 
Rs.1,000 fine to be paid @Rs.5 for each day of 
possession out of fine collected. Omission or failure to restore possession of 
property 
Abetment of offence Punishment as provided for particular offence. 


2. The Bonded Labour 
System (Abolition) Act, 
1976 —_—-— 
THE OBJECT 
The object of the Bonded Labour Act is to abolish:‘the bonded 
labour system and freeing and discharging every bonded labourer 
from any obligation to render any bonded labour. On the 
commencement of the Act, no person can compel any person to 
render any bonded labour or other form of forced labour and every 
obligation of a bonded labourer to repay any bonded debt or any 
bonded debt which may have remained unsatisfied is deemed to 
have been extinguished. This apart, no suit or other proceeding 
can lie for the recovery of any bonded debt or any part thereof 
before any civil court or any other authority. 
It is the duty of the Government to identify, release and 
rehabilitate the bonded labour and it cannot repudiate its 
obligation. 
ACT TO HAVE OVERRIDING EFFECT 
The provisions of the Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 
1976, by virtue of section 3, have the overriding effect on any other 
law contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than 
this Act. In other words, notwithstanding anything inconsistent 
14 


The Bonded Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 15 
contained in any enactment other than this Act, or in any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than 
this Act, the provisions of this Act shall have effect. 
AGREEMENT, CUSTOM, ETC., TO BE VOID 
On the commencement of the Bonded Labour Act, any custom 
or tradition or any contract, agreement or other instrument, 
whether entered into or executed before or after its commencement, 
by virtue of which any person, or any member of the family or 
dependent of such person, is required to do any work or render 
any service as a bonded labourer, is deemed to be void and 
inoperative. 
EXTINGUISHMENT OF LIABILITY TO REPAY BONDED DEBT 
The Act has also extinguished the liability of the bonded 
labourer to repay bonded debt. The Act has the effect of treating 
pending suit or proceeding for recovery of any advance made toa 
bonded labourer as dismissed or not enforceable. 
PROPERTY OF BONDED LABOURER TO BE FREED FROM 
MORTGAGE, ETC. 
All property vested in a bonded labourer which was or is under 
any mortgage, charge, lien or other encumbrances in connection 
with any bonded debt is to stand freed and discharged from such 
mortgage and is to be restored to the possession of such bonded 
labourer. 
FREED BONDED LABOURER NOT TO BE EVICTED FROM 
HOMESTEAD, ETC. 
No person, who has been freed and discharged under this Act 
from any obligation to render any bonded labour, is to be evicted 
from any homestead or other residential premises which he was 
occupying immediately before the commencement of the Act as 
part of the consideration for the bonded labour. And if any such 
person has been evicted from any such homestead or other 
residential premises then the same is to be restored as early as 
practicable to the possession of such bonded labourer, on his 
complaint. 


16 Labour Laws 
CREDITOR NOT TO ACCEPT PAYMENT AGAINST EXTINGUISHED 
DEBT 
After the commencement of the Act, the creditors are also 
forbidden to accept any payment against any bonded debt which 
has been extinguished or fully satisfied by virtue of the provisions 
of this Act. 
PUNISHMENT FOR CONTRAVENTION OF ABOVE PROVISIONS 
Whoever contravenes the provisions by accepting any payment 
against any bonded debt which has been extinguished or fully 
satisfied by virtue of the provisions of this Act is punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also 
with fine. 
PUNISHMENT FOR CONTRAVENTION OF OTHER PROVISIONS OF 
THE ACT 
Any person who after the commencement of the Act, compels 
any person to render any bonded labour is punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also 
with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees. For 
advancement of bonded debt, the punishment is imprisonment 
which may extend to three years and also fine which may extend 
to two thousand rupees. The punishment prescribed for extracting 
bonded labour under the bonded labour system, is the same viz. 
imprisonment of three years. Further, if a person fails or omits to 
restore possession of property to bonded labourer, he is liable to 
punishment with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees 
or with both. Any person who abets any offence punishable under 
this Act is also punishable under the Act, and for this purpose, 
“abetment” has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Penal 
Code. 


CHECKLIST « 
Object of the Act 
To regulate the 
employment of contract 
labour in certain 
establishments and to 
provide for its abolition in 
certain circumstances 
and for matters 
connected therewith. 
Prohibition of Employment of 
Contract Labour 
Only by the appropriate Government 
through issue ar Teication after 
consultation with the Board (and not 
Courts) can order the prohibition of 
employment of contract labour. 
Sec. 10 
Revocation or Suspension & 
Amendment of Licences 
* When obtained by misrepresen- 
tation or suppression of material facts. 
* Failure of the contractor to comply 
with the conditions or contravention of 
Act or the Rules. 
Sec. 14 
Laws, Agreement or Standing 
Orders inconsistent with the 
Act - Not Permissible 
= Unless the privileges in 
the contract between the 
parties are more favoura- 
ble than the prescribed in 
the Act, such contract will 
be invalid and the 
workers will continue to get more 
favourable benefits. Sec.30 
Registers of Contractors 
* Principal employer 
* To maintain a register of 
contractors in respect of every 
establishment in Form XIl. 
Rule 74 
* Contractor 
* To maintain register of workers 
for each registered establishment 
in Form Xill. 
* To issue an employment card to 
each worker in Form XIV. 
* To issue service certificate to 
every workman on his 
termination in Form XV. 
Rules 75, 76 and 77 
Returns 
Contractor to send half yearly return in 
Form XXIV in duplicate within 30 days 
Principal employer to send annual 
return in Form XXV in duplicate before 
15th Feb. following the end of the 
concerned year 
Rule 82 
PENALTIES 
Section Offence 
Sec. 22 
Sec. 23 Violation * Every establishmentin which 20 or more work 
men are employed or were employed’on any day 
of the preceding 12 months as contract labour. 
* Every contractor who employs or who employed 
on any day-of the preceding twelve months 20 or 
more workmen. CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION & ABOLITION) 
ACT, 1970 @--. 
Applicability Registration of ~ 
Establishment . . Sent . 
Principal employer employing 
20 or more workers through 
the contractor or the 
contractor(s) on deposit of 
required fee in Form 1. 
Sec. 7 Sec. 1 
Licensing of Contractor 
* Engaging 20 or more than 20 
workers and on yn deposit of 
required fee in Form IV. 
* Valid for specified period. 
—Sec. 12. Rule 21 [> Revocation of Registration 
When obtained by misrepresentation 
or suppression of material facts etc. 
after opportunity to the principal 
employer. 
Sec. 9 
Welfare measures to be taken by the Contractor 
* Contract labour either one hundred or more employed by a contractor By 4 one 
or more canteens shall be provided and maintained. 
* First Aid facilities. 
« Number of rest-rooms as required under the Act. 
* Drinking water, latrines and washing facilities. Secs. 16 & 17 
Responsibility of Contractor 
for Payment of Wages 
* To pay timely and to ensure the 
disbursement of wages in the 
presence of the authorised 
representative of the principal 
employer. 
* Rate of wages not less than the 
rates as fixed or prevailing in such 
employement as fixed by 
agreement. Liability of Principal 
Employer 
* To ensure provision for canteen, 
rest-rooms, sufficient supply of 
drinking water, latrines and urinals, 
washing facilities. 
* Principal employer entitled to 
recover from the contractor for 
providing such amenities or to 
make deductions from amount 
payable. 
Sec. 20 Sec.21, Rule 25 
Muster Roll, Wages Register, Deduction Register and Overtime 
Register by Contractor 
* Every contractor shall 
* Maintain Muster Roll and a Register of Wages in 
Form XVI and Form XVII respectively when combined. 
Register or wage-cum-Muster Roll in Form XVII where the 
wage period is a fortnight or less. 
Maintain a Register of Deductions for damage or loss, Register or Fines 
and Register of Advances in Form XX, form XXI and Form XxXIl 
respectively. 
* Maintain a Register of Overtime in Form XxiIll. 
* To issue wage slips in Form XIX, to the workmen at least a day prior to the 
disbursement of wages. 
* Obtain the signature or thumb impression of the worker concerned against 
the entries relating to him on the Register of Wages or Muster Roll-cum- 
Wages Register. 
* When covered by Payment of Wages Act, register and records to be 
maintained under these rules - 
* Muster Roll, « Register of Wages, * Register of Deductions, * Register of 
Overtime, * Register of Fines, * Register of Advances, * Wage slip. 
Rule 79 
* To display an abstract of the Act and Rules in English and Hindi and in the 
language spoken by the majority of workers in such form as may be 
approved by appropriate authority. Rule 80 
* To display notices showing rates of wages, hours of work, wage period, 
dates of payment, names and addresses of the inspector and to send copy to 
the inspector and any change forthwith. 
Punishment 
Obstructions | For obstructing the inspector or failing to produce registers etc 
- 3 months ‘imprisonment or fine upto Rs.500, or both 
For violation of the provisions of Act or the Rules, imprisonment of 3 months or 
fine upto Rs.1000, On continuing contravention, additional fine upto Rs.100 per day 


3. The Contract Labour 
(Regulation and 
Abolition) Act, 1970 . 
THE OBJECT 
The object of the Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) 
Act, 1970, is to regulate the employment of contract labour in _ , 
certain establishments and to provide for its abolition in certain’ /— 
circumstances and for matters connected therewith. \~ 
APPLICABILITY OF THE ACT 
This Act applies to every establishment in which 20 or more 
workmen are employed or were employed on any day_of the 
preceding 12 months as contract labour and to every contractor 
who employs or employed on any day of the preceding 12 months 
20 or more workmen. However, the appropriate Government is 
empowered to extend the application of the Act to any 
establishment or contractor employing less than 20 workmen, 
after giving not less than 2 months’ notice of its intention so to do, 
by notification in Official Gazette. 
The Act is not applicable to an_establishment in which work 
only of an intermittent or casual nature_is performed. Where, 
however, work is performed in an establishment for more than 120 
days in the preceding twelve months or if it is of seasonal nature 
and is performed for more than 60 days in a year, it shall not be 
deemed to be of an intermittent nature. 
18 


The Contract Labour (Regulation and 19 
Abolition) Act, 1970 
ESTABLISHMENT 
Section 2(1)(e) of the Act defines ‘establishment’. It means any 
office or department of the Government ora local-authority or any 
place where any industry,-trade;-business, manufacturing or 
occupation is carried-on. 
In an establishment to which the Act is applicable and where 
permitted if it is not registered. A contractor coming within the 
purview of the Act is not permitted to undertake or execute any 
work through contract labour until he obtains Pie from the 
licensing officer for execution of a specific contract. 
APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT 
According to section 2(1), the ‘appropriate Government’ 
means— 
(i) in relation to an establishment under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947, the Central Government; ~~ 
(ii) in relation to any other establishment, the Government of 
the State in which that other establishment is situate. 
In view of the above, the Central Government has jurisdiction 
over the establishments in respect of which the appropriate 
Government under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is the 
Central Government and for other establishments, the State 
Governments concerned are the appropriate Government. 
WORKMAN 
“Workman” has been defined under section 2(i) to mean any 
person employed in or in cénnectior/ with the work of any 
establishment to do any skilled, semi-skilled-or un-skilled manual, 
supervisory, technical or clerical work for. hire or reward» whether 
the terms of employment be express or implied, but does not 
include any such person— 
(a) who is employed mainly in a managerial or 
administrative capacity, or 
(b) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity draws 
wages exceeding five hundred rupees per mensum or 
exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the 
office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions 
mainly of a managerial nature; or r+ 


20 Labour Laws 
(c) who is an out-worker, that is to say, a person to whom 
any articles and materials are given out by or on behalf of 
the principal employer to be made up, cleaned, washed, 
altered, ornamented, finished, repaired, adapted or 
otherwise processed for sale for the purposes of the trade 
or business of the principal employer and the process is to 
be carried out either in the home of the out-worker or in 
some other premises not being premises under the control 
and management of the principal employer. 
REGISTRATION ay PRINCIPAL EMPLOYER 
Principal Empldyer means sie owner of occupier or the person 
who exercises tiltimate contrél and § ision and managgs the 
affairs of the establishment. 
establishment to which the Act applies shall employ contract 
labour without obtaining registration certificate within the 
prescribed time and Bee an establishment the 
registration has been revoked under section 8 of the Act. Sachin: According to section 9, no_ principal | pnpley of an 
If an establishment has more than one contractor each 
employing less thar 20 workers, the Act will not be applicable to 
any such contractor, though the establishment will be covered by 
the Act if the total number of workmen employed by such 
contractors is twenty or more. The number of workmen employed 
by a contractor should be taken into consideration to decide 
whether the contractor should obtain aicence under the Act or 
not. 
LICENCE FOR CONTRACTOR 
Contractor in relation to the establishment means a person who 
undertakes to produce a given result for the establishment other 
than a mere supply of goods or articles of manufacture to such 
establishment, through contract labour or who supplies contract 
labour for any work of the establishment and includes a sub- 
contractor. | 
No contractor to whom this Act applies shall undertake or 
execute any work through contract labour except under and in 
accordance with a licence issued in that behalf by the Licensing 
Officer. 


The Contract Labour (Regulation and 21 
Abolition) Act, 1970 
Every contractor falling within the purview of the Act shall 
apply for a licence for executing any work through contract 
labour, in or in respect of establishment to which the Act is 
applicable. According to Rule 24 of the Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition) Central Rules, 1971, before a licence is 
issued, an amount calculated as prescribed under the Rules for 
each of the workmen to be employed as contract labour in respect 
of which the application for licence has been made shall be 
deposited by the contractor for due performance of the conditions 
of the licence and compliance with the provisions of the Act or 
Rules made thereunder. Thus a contractor is required to obtain a 
licence for every contract and to deposit security at the rate 
prescribed under the said Rules for each workman employed by 
him for each contract. fy 
PROHIBITION OF CONTRACT LABOUR <-> 
The employment of contract labour Tinder the Act is permissible 
in different processes/operations in the industry, lunes it is 
prohibited in accordance with the procedure laid down under the 
Act. / 
According to section 10 of the Act, the appropriate Government 
may, after consultation with the Central Board or, as the case may 
be, a State Board, prohibit by notification in the Official | Gazette, 
_ employment of contract labour in any process, operation or other 
‘work in any establishment. Before issuing such notification in 
relation to an establishment, the appropriate Government shall 
~ have regard to the conditions of work and benefits provided for 
the contract labour in that establishment, and other relevant 
factors, such as— 
(a) whether process, operation or other work is incidental to 
or necessary for the industry, trade, business, 
manufacture or occupation that is carried on in the 
establishment; 
(b) whether it is of a perennial nature, that is to say, it is of 
sufficient duration having regard to the nature of 
industry, trade, business, manufacture or occupation 
carried on in that establishment; 
(c) whether it is done ordinarily through regular workmen in 
that establishment or an establishment similar thereto; 
and 


22 Labour Laws 
(d) whether it is sufficient to employ considerable number of 
whole time workmen. 
If a question arises whether any process or operation or other 
work is of a perennial nature, the decision of the appropriate 
Government thereon shall be final. 
EFFECT OF NON-REGISTRATION 
The matter whether the contract workers working in an 
establishment of principal employer who have not obtained 
registration certificate will be treated as workers of the principal 
employer, has always remained in dispute. Earlier, the number of 
High Courts have held that in case the principal employer did not 
obtain the registration certificate under section 7 or_a contractor 
has not obtained a licence under section 12 of the Act, the 
contractor’s workers will be- deemed to be the employees of the 
principal employer. 
The Supreme Court in one judgment has held that if the 
principal employer does not get registration under section 7 and/ 
or the contractor does not get a licence under section 12 of the 
Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, the persons so 
appointed by the contractor would not be deemed to be the direct 
employees of the principal employer. 
ABSORPTION OF CONTRACT LABOUR 
It has been well settled by the various judgments of the Apex 
Court and High Courts that the contractor’s employees will not 
become the employees of the principal employer, even-if-the 
principal employer does not get registration and the contractor 
does not hold licence, though employing contract labour without 
obtaining registration or without obtaining licence is an offence 
under the Act. Also if the principal employer terminates the 
contract of the contractor and thus the employees of the contractor 
become surplus, it is not obligatory on the eo employer to 
absorb the employees of contractor. 
NO AUTOMATIC ABSORPTION OF CONTRACT LABOUR ON X 
PROHIBITION/ABOLITION 
The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has set aside the 
earlier judgment of ‘Air India by holding that on abolition or 
prohibition of contract labour, the employees/workers engaged 


The Contract Labour (Regulation and 23 
Abolition) Act, 1970 
through the contractor will not automatically become the 
employees of the principal employer. 
Steel Authority of India Ltd. v. National Union, Water Front 
Workers, 2001 LLR 961 (SC). 
APPROPRIATE GOVERNMENT AND NOT COURTS CAN ORDER FOR 
ABOLITION OF CONTRACT LABOUR 
The Apex Court has clarified that the power of abolition/ 
prohibition of contract labour is vested with the appropriate 
ec and not with the Courts. Rn er 
PAYMENT. OF WAGES TO CONTRACT LABOUR 
Basically a contractor is.responsible for payment of wages to\ 
workmen employed by him as contract labour, before the expiry of 
the specified period. Every principal_employer is required to 
nominate a representative-duly authorised by him to be present at 
the time of disbursement of wages by the contractor and it is the 
duty of ee to sed the amounts paid as ee 
Se el 
short atnkene the principal employer is made liable to make 
payment of wages in full or the unpaid balance, as the case may 
be. 
According to Rule 25(2)(iv) of the Contract Labour (Regulation 
and Abolition) Central Rules, 1971, the rates of wages payable to 
the workmen by the contractor shall not be less than the rates 
prescribed under the Minimum Wages Act for such employment 
where-applicable and where the rates have been fixed by 
agreement, settlement or award, not less than the rate so fixed. 
According to Rtile 25(2)(v)(a), in case where the workmen 
employed by the contractor perform the same or similar kind of 
work as the workmen directly employed by the principal employer 
of the establishment, the wage rates, holidays, hours of work and 
other conditions of service of the workmen of the contractor shall 
be the same as applicable to the workmen directly employed by 
the principal employer of the establishment on the same or similar 
kind of work. In case of disagreement with regard to the type of 
work, the same shall be decided by the Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central) whose decision shall be final. \ 


24 Labour Laws 
LIABILITIES OF THE CONTRACTOR AND PRINCIPAL EMPLOYER 
The Act stipulates to be provided and the responsibilities to be 
imposed for looking after the welfare and health of the contract 
labour, in as much_as_it~has~been made obligatory~on the 
contractor employing contract labour to provide and maintain 
sufficient supply of wholesome drinking water and reasonable 
number of latrines, urinals and washing facilities, etc. Where such 
facilities and amenities are not provided by the contractor, the 
responsibility shifts to the principal employer to provide other 
suitable and adequate facilities to the-contract-labour: Canteen 
facilities are also to be provided by the contractor in “the 
establishment wherein more than 100 workers are likely to work 
for six months or more. Provisiorrand maintenance of first-aid box 
equipped with requisite materials and medicines is another 
requirement. 
All expenses incurred by the principal employer in providing 
the amenities may be recovered by the principal employer from the 
contractor either by deduction from any amount payable to the 
contractor or as a debt payable by the contractor. 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES 
According to section 25(1) of the Act, if a person committing an 
offence under the Act is a company, the company as well as every 
person _incharge of and responsible to the company for the 
conduct of its business at the time of COffitission of the offence 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. According to 
section 25(2) of the Act, notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (1), where an offence under the Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent_or connivance of or_ that the 
commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the: part 
of-any~director, manager, managing agent or such other officer 
shall also be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
OTHER LABOUR ACTS APPLICABLE TO CONTRACTORS’ 
ESTABLISHMENTS/CONTRACT LABOUR 
1. Factories Act, 1948: 
The definition of ‘worker’ under the Factories Act does not 
make any discrimination between the person directly employed by 


The Contract Labour (Regulation and 25 
Abolition) Act, 1970 
the principal employer and person employed by or through a 
contractor in the defined processes and consequently the contract 
labour thus employed shall be entitled to all the privileges and 
benefits applicable to the workers in a factory, for example, weekly 
holidays, compensatory holidays, extra wages for overtime, leave 
with wages, etc., subject to such conditions as are prescribed in 
the relevant sections of the Act. 
2. The Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952: 
The term ‘employee’ used in section 2(f) of the Act includes any 
person employed by or through a contractor-im-or in connection 
with the work of an establishment to which the said Act applies 
and he will thus get the advantage of the schemes framed under 
the Act. The prescribed contributions have to be made in respect of 
the contract labour in the same manner and at the same rates as 
applicable to the employees directly employed by the 
establishment. The principal employer has to pay _ the 
contributions in respect of contractor’s employees-as well as his 
own employees.in the first instance but the amount paid on behalf 
of the contractor is recoverable from the latter. ae 
3. The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948: 
The contract labour is entitled to the benefit conferred by the 
Act so long as they meet the requirement of the expression 
‘employee’ as defined under section 2(9) of the Employees’ State 
Insurance Act. The principal employer is liable to pay both the 
employer’s contributions and the employees’ contributions in 
respect of contract labour in the first instance but the amount so 
paid is recoverable ‘from the contractor concerned. 
4. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936: 
The provisions of the Act are duly applicable to the contract 
labour employed by any factory or establishment if the 
employment in wh which t h they are engaged is otherwise covered by 
the said Act. 
5. The Minimum Wages Act, 1948: 
The provisions of the Act are applicable to the contract labour if 
the employment-in which they are engaged is duly covered by 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948. 
ee 


26 Labour Laws 
6. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947: 
The Act is applicable to deal with any dispute between the 
contractors and the labour employed by them. eee 
7. The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923: 
Under section 12 of the Act the principal employer who 
engages a contractor for the purpose of his trade or business for 
the execution of whole or any part of any work, which is 
ordinarily part of the trade or business of the principal employer, 
shall be liable to pay the same compensation to the worker of the 
said contractor as he would have been liable to pay if the worker 
had been directly employed by him. However, the principal 
employer shall be indemnified by the contractor and it is open to a 
workman employed by the contractor to recover compensation 
from the contractor directly instead of proceeding against the 
principal employer. eee 
MAINTENANCE OF PRESCRIBED REGISTERS, RECORDS AND 
SUBMISSION OF RETURNS 
Section 29 of the Act enjoins upon every principal employer 
and the contractor to maintain the registers and records giving 
prescribed particulars of the contractor and the contract labour 
employed respectively, indicating the nature of work performed by 
the contract labour and the rate of wages paid to the contract 
labour. In short, the forms, registers and notices prescribed for the 
purpose are stated hereinafter— 
(a) Principal employer to maintain register of contractor in 
Form XI; 
(b) Every contractor to maintain in respect of each registered 
establishment where he employs contract labour a register 
in Form XII; 
(c) Every contractor to issue an employment card in Form 
XIV to each worker and to issue a service certificate on 
termination of employment in Form XV; 
(d) Every contractor in respect of each work has to maintain 
registers like— 
(i) Muster Roll; 
(ii) Register of Wages; 
(iii) Register of Deductions; 


(e) 
(g) The Contract Labour (Regulation and 27 
Abolition) Act, 1970 
(iv) Register of Overtime; 
(v) Register of Fines; 
(vi) Register of Advances; and; 
(vil) Wage slips. 
However, if a combined/alternative form is being 
maintained under any Act or Rule, which provides 
the above information, as required under the Contract 
Labour Act or Rules, the same could be done with 
previous approval of the competent authority; 
Duty to display notice in English and local languages : 
Rule 81 of the rules enjoins upon the principal 
employer or the contractor, as the case may be, to exhibit 
the notices showing the rates of wages, hours of work, 
wage period, dates of payment of wages, names and 
addresses of the inspectors having jurisdiction in English 
and in Hindi and in the local language understood by the 
majority of workers at a conspicuous place and send a 
copy of the same to the Area Inspector; 
Submission of half-yearly return to the Licensing Officer: 
Every contractor is under obligation to send half-yearly 
return in Form XXIV in duplicate so as to reach the 
Licensing Officer concerned not later than 30 days from 
the close of the half year, i.e., for the period ending June 
and December. A principal employer has to send an 
annual return in Form XXV in duplicate so as to reach the 
authorities by 15th February following the close of the 
year; 
Welfare and other amenities for contract labour: 
The contractor is required to provide suitable canteen, 
sufficiently lighted and ventilated rest rooms, creches 
(having-the-requisite number of employees), latrines, 
urinals;-wholesome drinking water, washing facilities 
and first-aid-boxes-for the use by the contract labour. If a 
contractor fails to provide such facilities, the principal 
employer shall be liable to provide the same and recover 
the expenses involved from the contractor. 
Before concluding, we must have a look on the 
procedure as laid down in the rules under the Act for the 


28 Labour Laws 
purpose of registration of principal employers and 
licensing of the contractors. 
We are aware that the Act is applicable to principal 
employer who has twenty persons working as contract 
labour through one or more contractors. While the Act is 
applicable to only such contractors who have 20 
employees working under him in a_ particular 
establishment. 
The procedure for registration and licensing is as 
under: 
1. Application for registration as principal employer is 
to be made in Form I to the Registering Officer of the 
area to be accompanied by a Demand Draft showing 
payment of the prescribed fee for registration and 
such application is to be delivered either personally 
or sent by registered post. (Section 7 — Rule 17). 
2. Registering Officer shall issue a registration certificate 
in Form II containing the name and address of the 
establishment, maximum number of labour to be 
employed as contract labour in the establishment, 
nature of business/trade and such other particulars 
as may be deemed necessary. The Registering Officer 
is required to maintain a register in Form III (Section 7 
— Rule 18). 
3. Once the establishment is registered, change if any in 
any of the particulars in the certificate of registration 
shall have to be intimated to the Registering Officer 
within 30 days of the change and in case of change in 
the number of contract labour, particularly, one has to 
deposit extra amount with the authorities (Rule 20). 
4. Renewal application is required to be made 30 days 
in advance with the requisite information to be 
furnished in Form VII. 
5. Similarly, a contractor having 20 or more employees 
shall have to make an application in Form IV to the 
Licensing Officer of the area who is usually the 
Registering Officer for grant of a licence, alongwith 
the certificate from principal employer in Form V 
which carries an undertaking from the latter that he 


The Contract Labour (Regulation and 29 
Abolition) Act, 1970 
would be bound by the provisions of the Act and 
rules in so for as the same relate to him. The 
application is to be accompanied with requisite fee 
and security for each of the labour so engaged at the 
rates specified. Such a licence is valid for a period of 
one year from the date it is granted (Rules 21, 24, and 
27). The said licence shall have to be got renewed by 
depositing the requisite fee after the expiry of the 
period from which the same had been granted. 
. The contractor shall observe the conditions appended 
to the licence as laid down in rule 25 which are 10 in 
number, but a few are quite important like the number 
of employees should not increase than the one for 
which the licence has been granted, to get the licence 
renewed, to pay the rate of wages to his employees at 
the same rate as is given to the employees doing same 
or similar work by the principal employer, but in no 
case the rate of wages can be less than the minimum 
rate of wages. The other conditions of service relating 
to working hours, weekly off, leave, etc., have also to 
be at par with the employees of principal employer. In 
case of disagreement over the type of work it is the 
Labour Commissioner in case of State Governments to 
determine whether the work done by the employees of 
the contractor is same or of similar nature when 
compared with the employees of the principal 
employers. 
. In case the Registration Certificate or the Licence is 
either not granted or not renewed, an appeal can be 
made within 30 days of the communication of the | 
order to the Appellate Authority by depositing | 
requisite fee and enclosing a copy of the order of | 
Registering / Licensing Officer as the case may be. 
It may be mentioned that no such formality as 
aforementioned is required in case the work is to last 
for less than 15 days. 


30 Labour Laws 
GUIDELINES FOR DRAFTING AGREEMENT BETWEEN PRINCIPAL 
EMPLOYER AND THE CONTRACTOR 
The agreement should be drafted and executed on non- 
judicial stamp paper 
The agreement must disclose the names, addresses of the 
contractor and the principal employer. 
The agreement must disclose the place of work, time of 
working, rate of compensation (towards consideration) and 
consequences arising out of breach of contract and 
procedure for termination by either of the parties to the 
agreement. 
The agreement must carry out the objectives of statutory 
provisions and judicial pronouncements. 
The agreement must disclose the scope of work, deployment 
of manpower in number, period of validity, compensation, 
security deposit and terms of payment of bills. 
The agreement should be between the contractor and the 
principal employer and should be witnessed by two 
witnesses. 


THE CHILD LABOUR 
(PROHIBITION AND REGULATION) 
CHECKLIST ACT, 1986 
Object of the The important clarifications Prohibition of employment of 
Act * ‘Child’ means a person who has not children in certain 
To regulate the completed his 14 years of age. occupations and processes conditions of the * ‘Establishment includes a shop, commercial No child to be employed in 
work of the children establishment, workshop, farm, residential occupation set forth in Part A of the 
in certain hotel, restaurant, eating house, theatre or Schedule or any workshop wherein 
employment. other place of public amusement or any of the processes set-forth in 
entertainment. Sec. 2 Part B of the Schedule is carried on. 
Sec. 3 
Hours and period of work Not permitted to work 
* Not to exceed three hours * Between 7 pm to 8 am. 
* Interval for rest- one hour * Overtime working. Weekly holidays 
* Spread over not more than If such a child is working One whole day, not to be altered 
six hours inclusive of interval in another establishment. more than once in three months. 
and the time spent for waiting. Sec. 7 Sec. 8 
Sec.7 
Notice to Inspector Dispute as to age Maintenance & — 
Furnishing details of production of 
* Name and situation of establishment. In the absence of certificate register by occupier 
* Name of the person in actual : of age, can be referred for * The name and 
management of the establishment. |. decision of prescribed date of birth of 
* Address for communication. medical authority. every child so 
* Nature of the occupation. : Sec. 10 employed or 
permitted to 
work. 
* Hours and period of 
Display of notice Health and safety work of any such child and the intervals of rest 
to which he is entitled. 
¢ The nature of work of 
any such child. 
* Such other particulars 
as may be prescribed. 
Sec. 11 To contain abstract of section 
3 pertaining to prohibition of 
employment of children and 
the provisions for penalties. 
| PENALTIES bg 
Offence 
for violation of section 3 Imprisonment for not less than 3 months which may extend to one year, 
or fine not less than 10,000/- which may extend to Rs.20,000/- or both. 
Repetition of violation Imprisonment for a term not less than six months which may extend to 
two years. 
For failure to : 
* give notice as required by section 9 
* maintain a register as required by 
section 11 or make any false entry in 
any such registers; or 
* display a notice containing an 
abstract of section 3 and this section 
as required by section 12, or 
* comply with or contravene any other 
provisions of this Act or the Rules 
made thereunder. To be notified by appropriate 
government in accordance 
with guidelines given in 
section 13 of the Act. 
Sec. 13 
Shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one 
month or with fine which at dot at Ge ache extend to ten thousand rupees or with 
both. 
The Supreme Court in M.C. Mehta v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1996 SCC 756 has directed the discontinuance of the 
employment of child labour and ordered payment of compensation of Rs.20,000 per child. The court has also laid 
down certain directions in relation to working hours in non-hazardous jobs and providing for education by the 
employer and the State. 


4. The Child Labour 
(Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 
ze | 
The main object of the Act is to prohibit the engagement of 
children who have not completed 14th year of age in certain 
employments and to regulate the conditions of work of children in 
certain other employments. Employment of children has been 
prohibited in occupations relating to (1) transport of passengers, 
goods or mails by railways, (2) sinder picking, clearing of ash pit 
or building operations in the railway premises, (3) catering 
establishments in railways, (4) construction of a railway station, 
(5) ports. Employment of children is also prohibited in the 
following industries : (1) bidi making, (2) carpet weaving, 
(3) cement manufacture, including bagging of cement, (4) cloth 
printing, dyeing and weaving, (5) manufacture of matches, 
explosives and fire works, (6) mega cutting and _ splitting, 
(7) shellac manufacture, (8) soap manufacture, (9) tanning, 
(10) wool cleaning, (11) building and construction industry. The 
Government has also prohibited employment of children in the 
following occupations or processes: (1) Abattoirs/Slaughter 
houses, (2) hazardous processes and dangerous operations as 
notified, (3) printing, as defined, (4) cashew and cashewnut 
descaling and processing, (5) soldering processes in electronic 
industry. The Act provides that no child shall be permitted to 
work between 7 p.m. and 8 a.m. and shall not be permitted to work 
over-time. No child shall work for more than 3 hours before he 
32 


The Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) 33 
Act, 1986 
has an interval of one hour. Spread over has been fixed at six 
hours. A child cannot work in more than one establishment on 
any day. A weekly holiday is allowed. The Act also provides for 
health and safety measures for the children. The employer is 
required to notify the Factory Inspectors in case he engages a child 
for employment. Production of certificate of age is also required 
under the rules of the Act. For contravention of provisions of the 
Act, the employer will be punishable with imprisonment of not 
less than three months which may extend to one year or with a 
fine of Rs. 10,000 which may extend to Rs. 20,000 or with both. In 
case the offence is repeated, imprisonment shall not be less than 
six months which may extend to two years. 
The Supreme Court in M.C. Mehta v. State of Tamil Nadu, 1996 
SCC 756, has directed the discontinuance of the employment of 
child and ordered payment of compensation of Rs. 20,000 per 
child. The court has also laid down certain directions in relation 
to working hours in non-hazardous jobs and providing for 
education by the employer and the State. 
It is pertinent to state that the employment of children as 
domestic servants in dhabas (roadside eateries), restaurants, 
hotels, motels, teashops, resorts, spas or in other recreational 
centres has been banned from October 10, 2006 not only in Delhi 
but all over India. The ban, notified by the labour ministry has 
been imposed under the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) 
Act, 1986. The decision has been taken on the recommendation of 
the Technical Advisory Committee on Child Labour. The 
committee had stated that the occupations mentioned were 
hazardous for children and had recommended their inclusion in 
the occupations which are prohibited for persons below 14 years 
under the Child Labour (Prohibition & Regulation) Act, 1986. 
MAINTENANCE OF REGISTER 
Every occupier shall maintain in respect of children employed 
or permitted to work in any establishment, a register to be 
available for inspection by an Inspector at all times during 
working hours or when work is being carried on in any such 
establishment, showing— 
(a) the name and date of birth of every child so employed or 
permitted to work; 


34 Labour Laws 
(b) hours and periods of work of any such child and the 
intervals of rest to which he is entitled; 
(c) the nature of work of any such child; and 
(d) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 
PENALTIES 
Any employer who 
e fails to give notice as required by section 9; or 
e fails to maintain a register as required by section 11 or 
makes any false entry in any such register; or 
¢ fails to display a notice containing an abstract of section 3 
and section 12; or 
¢ fails to comply with or contravenes any other provisions 
of this Act or the rules made thereunder, 
shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend 
to one month or with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees or with both. 
DISPLAY OF NOTICE 
A notice containing abstracts of sections 3 and 14 of the Act, 
mainly provided for railway administration and port authority, 
shall be caused to be displayed by every occupier in a 
conspicuous and accessible place at every station on its railway or 
within the limits of a port or at the place of work, as the case may ° 
be, in the local language and in the English language. 


EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS & 
MISC. PROVISIONS ACT 
& THE SCHEMES CHECKLIST 
Eligibility 
Any person who is employed for work 
of an establishment or employed 
through contractor in or in connection 
with the work of an establishment. 
Payment of Contribution 
— — 
a epaaicatie ee 
* The employer shall pay the 
contribution payable to the EPF, DLI 
and Employees’ Pension Fund in 
respect of the member of the 
Employees’ Pension Fund employed 
by him directly by or through a 
contractor. 
* It shall be the responsibility of the 
principal employer to pay the 
contributions payable to the EPF, DLI 
and Employees’ Pension Fund by 
himself in respect of the employees 
directly employed by him and also in 
respect of the employees employed by 
or through a contractor. 
Clarification about 
Contributicn 
After revision in wage ceiling from Rs.5000 to 
Rs.6500 wef. 1-6-2001 per month, the 
government will continue to contribute 
1.16% upto the actual wage of maximum 
Rs.6500 per month towards Employees’ 
Pension Scheme. The employer's share in 
the Pension Scheme will be Rs.541 w.e.f. 
1-6-2001 
Under Employees’ Deposit-Linked Insurance 
Scheme the contribution @ 0.50% is 
required to be paid upto a maximum limit of 
Rs.6500 The employer will pay 
administrative charge @ 0.01% on a 
maximum limit of Rs.6500. 
The employer will also pay administrative 
charges @ 0.01% on maximum limit of 
Rs.6500 whereas an exempted 
establishment will pay inspection charges @ 
0.005% on the total wages paid 
Notes: 
(1) The above clarification is given by taking 
wages upto a maximum of Rs.6500 towards 
wage (basic + DA) 
(2) Since an excluded employee /.e. drawing 
wages more than Rs.6500 can also become 
member of the Fund and the Schemes on 
joint request and if, for instance, such an 
employee is getting Rs.10,000 per month, his 
share towards provident fund contribution will 
be As.1200 6g. 12% and employer's share 
towards provident fund contribution will be 
As.659 and Rs.541 towards Employees’ 
Pension Fund Applicability 
* Every establishment 
which is a factory engaged 
in any industry specified in 
Schedule 1 and in which 
20 or more persons are 
employed. 
* Any other establishment 
employing 20 or more 
persons which Central 
Government may, by 
notification, specify in this 
behalf. 
* Any establishment 
employing even less than 
20 persons can be 
covered voluntarily u/s 
1(4) of the Act. Benefits 
Employees 
covered enjoy a 
benefit of Social 
Security in the 
form of an unattachable and 
unwithdrawable (except in 
severely restricted circumstan- 
ces like buying house, marriage/ 
education, etc.) financial nest 
egg to which employees and 
employers contribute equally 
throughout the covered persons’ 
employment. 
This sum is payable normally on 
retirement or death. Other 
Benefits include Employees’ 
Pension Scheme and 
Employees’ Deposit Linked 
Insurance Scheme. 
Rates of Contribution [i 
Provident 
Fund 
Scheme Amount >.8.33% 
(in case where 
contribution is 
12% or 10%) 
10% (in case of 
certain Establish- 
ments as per 
details given 
Insurance ° 
Pension 
Scheme 
* Less than 2 months 8.33% 
(Diverted out of 
Provident Fund 
Contributions) 
Damages 
@17% per annum 
* Two months and above but less than 
four months . @22% per annum 
* Four months and above but less than 
six months 
* Six months and above . @27% per annum 
. @37% per annum 
Penal Provision 
Liable to be arrested without warrant being a cognisable 
¥) offence. Defaults by employer in paying contributions or 
¥ inspection/administrative charges attract imprisonment 
upto 3 years and fine upto Rs.10,000 (S.14). For any 
retrospective application, all dues have to be paid by 
employer with damages upto 100% of arrears. 


5. The Employees 
Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1952 . -o- 
THE OBJECT 
Among the social security legislations, the Employees’ 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act occupies the 
most important position. The Act came into existence in 1952 to 
ensure compulsory Provident Fund, Employees Pension Scheme 
and Deposit Linked Insurance in factories and_ other 
establishments for the benefits of employees. 
APPLICABILITY OF THE ACT 
It is a Central Act and extends to whole of India except the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir. It applies to those factories which employ 
twenty or more persons and are engaged in the manufacturing of 
the items as mentioned in Schedule I of the Act. Apart from 
factories, the Act also applies to other establishments wherein 
twenty or more persons are employed and also that the Central 
Government has issued notification for coverage of establishments 
under section 1(3) of the Act. The infancy benefit for first three 
years from setting up of the factory or an establishment about the 
applicability of the Act, hitherto available stands withdrawn w.e.f. 
23-9-1997 by Amendment Act 10 of 1998. 
36 


The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 37 
Provisions Act, 1952 
The Employees’ Pension Scheme (EPS), 1995 applies w.e.f. 
16-11-1995 to all establishments to which the Employees’ 
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 is 
applicable and on its introduction the Family Pension Scheme, 
1971 ceases to exist. 
Rate of Contributions 
An employer has to make a matching contribution of 10% and 
12% (as revised w.e.f. 22-9-1997) of employees’ pay to Provident 
Fund Account. The rate of contribution towards the Employees’ 
Pension Fund is 8.33% of pay, i.e., basic wages with dearness 
allowance, retaining allowance and cash value of food concession 
admissible, if any. 
Payment of Contribution 
1. The employer shall pay the contribution payable to the 
Employees’ Pension Fund in respect of the member of the 
Employees’ Pension Fund employed by him directly or by 
or through a contractor. 
2. It shall be the responsibility of the principal employer to 
pay the contributions payable to the Employees’ Pension 
Fund by himself in respect of the employees directly 
employed by him and also in respect of the employees 
employed by or through a contractor. 
LEVY OF DAMAGES WHEN THE PAYMENT OF CONTRIBUTION IS 
DELAYED 
The employer of an establishment to which the provisions of 
the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1952 apply must pay the contributions payable under the 
E.P.F. & M.P. Act, Family Pension Fund or Insurance Fund, both 
the employees’ contribution as well as his own every month 
within the time specified in Para 38(1) of the Employees’Provident 
Funds Scheme, 1952, 1.e., before 15th of the following month. On 
failure to do so, the Central Provident Commissioner or such 
officer as may be authorised by the Central Government may 
recover from the employer by way of penalty such damages, not 
exceeding the amount of arrears, as may be specified in the 
Scheme. However, the Central Board is empowered to reduce or 
waive the damages in relation to an establishment which is a sick 
industrial company and in respect of which a scheme for 


38 Labour Laws 
rehabilitation has been sanctioned by Board of Industrial and 
Financial Reconstruction established under section 4 of the Sick 
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 subject to 
such terms and conditions as may be specified in the Scheme. 
RECOVERY OF DAMAGES FOR DEFAULT IN PAYMENT OF ANY 
CONTRIBUTIONS: 
1. Where an employer makes default in the payment of any 
contribution to the Employees’ Pension Fund, or in the payment of 
any charges payable under any other provisions of the Act or the 
Scheme, the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or such officer 
as may be authorised by the Central Government, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, in this behalf, may recover from the 
employer by way of penalty, damages at the rates given below:— 
Period of default 
(a) Less than two months Rate of damages 
(Percentage of 
arrears per annum) 
Seventeen 
(b) Two months and above but less 
than four months Twenty-Two 
(c) Four months and above but less 
than six months Twenty-Seven. 
Thirty-Seven. Six months and above 
2. The damages shall be calculated to the nearest rupee, 50 
paise or more to be counted as the nearest higher rupee and 
fraction of a rupee less than 50 paise to be ignored. 
WAGES ETC., OF THE EMPLOYEES CANNOT BE REDUCED 
No employer in relation to an establishment to which any 
Scheme or the Insurance Scheme applies shall, by reason only of 
his liability for the payment of any contribution to the Fund or the 
Insurance Fund or any charges under this Act or the Scheme or 
the Insurance Scheme, reduce whether directly or indirectly, the 
wages of any employee to whom the Scheme or the Insurance 
Scheme applies or the total quantum of benefits in the nature of 
old age pension, gratuity, Provident Fund or Life Insurance to 
which the employee is entitled under the terms of his employment, 
express or implied. 


The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 39 
Provisions Act, 1952 
PAYMENT OF CONTRIBUTION ALSO FOR THE EMPLOYEES OF A 
CONTRACTOR 
(1) The employer shall, in the first instance, pay both the 
contribution payable by himself (in the scheme referred to as the 
employer’s contribution) and also on behalf of the member 
employed by him directly or by or through a contractor, the 
contribution payable by such member in the Scheme referred to as 
the member's contribution. 
(2) In respect of employees employed by or through a 
contractor, the contractor shall recover the contribution payable by 
such employee (in the Scheme referred to as the member’s 
contribution) and shall pay to the principal employer the amount 
of member’s contribution so deducted together with an equal 
amount of contribution in this Scheme referred to as the 
employer's contribution and also administrative charges. 
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the principal employer to pay 
both the contributions payable by himself in respect of the 
employees directly employed by him and also in respect of the 
employees employed by or through a contractor and also 
administrative charges. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this paragraph the 
expression “administrative charges” means such percentage of 
the pay (basic wages, dearness allowance, retaining allowance, if 
any and cash value of food concessions admissible thereon) for 
the time being payable to the employees other than an excluded 
employee, and in respect of which Provident Fund contributions 
are payable as the Central Government may, in consultation with 
the Central Board and having regard to the resources of the Fund 
for meeting its normal administrative expenses fix. 
(4) An employer shall not be entitled to deduct the employer’s 
contribution from the wages of a member or otherwise to recover it 
from him. 
DECLARATION BY PERSON TAKING UP EMPLOYMENT 
The employer in relation to a factory or other establishment 
shall before taking any person into employment, ask him to state 
in writing whether or not he is a member of the Fund and if he is, 
ask for the Account Number and/or the name and particulars of 
the last employer, if he is unable to furnish the Account Number. 


40 Labour Laws 
He shall require such person to furnish and such person shall, on 
demand, furnish to him for communication to the Commissioner 
particulars regarding himself and his nominee required for the 
Declaration Form. Such employer shall enter the particulars in the 
Declaration Form and obtain the signature or thumb impression of 
the person concerned: 
Declaration by persons taking up employment after the Fund had 
been established. 
The employer shall before taking any person into employment, 
ask him/her to state in writing whether or not he is a member of 
the Employees’ Pension Fund and, if he/she is, also ask him/her 
to furnish a copy of the scheme certificate issued by the 
Commissioner to him/her in respect of the past employment in 
terms of paragraph 12 as the case may be. If the person concerned 
was not in employment previously or had availed of return of 
contribution in respect of his/her previous employment, he/she 
shall, on demand by the employer, furnish to him, for 
communication to the Commissioner particulars concerning him/ 
herself and his/her family in the Form prescribed by the Central 
Provident Fund Commissioner. 
PREPARATION OF CONTRIBUTION CARDS 
The employer shall prepare a contribution card in Form 3 or 
Form 3A as may be appropriate, in respect of every employee in 
his employment at the commencement of the Scheme or who is 
taken into employment after that date and who is required or 
entitled to become or is a member of the Fund including those who 
produce an Account Number and.in respect of whom no fresh 
Declaration Form is prepared : 
Provided that in the case of any such employee who has 
become a member of the Family Pension Fund under the 
Employees’ Family Pension Scheme, 1971, the aforesaid Forms 
shall also contain such particulars as are necessary to comply 
with the requirements of that Scheme. 
PREPARATION OF CONTRIBUTION CARDS FOR EMPLOYEES’ 
PENSION SCHEME 
The employer shall prepare as Employees’ Pension Fund 
Contribution Card, in respect of each employee who has become a 
amember of the Employees’ Pension Fund. 
A 


The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 41 
Provisions Act, 1952 
DUTIES OF EMPLOYERS UNDER EMPLOYEES’ PROVIDENT FUNDS 
SCHEME 
(1) Every employer shall send to the Commissioner, within 
fifteen days of the commencement of this Scheme, a consolidated 
return in such form as the Commissioner may specify, of the 
employees required or entitled to become members of the Fund 
showing the basic wage, retaining allowance (if any) and 
dearness allowance including the cash value of any food 
concession paid to each of such employees: 
Provided that if there is no employee who is required or entitled 
to become a member of the Fund, the employer shall send a ‘Nil’ 
return. 
(2) Every employer shall send to the Commissioner within 
fifteen days of the close of each month a return— 
(a) in Form 5, of the employees qualifying to become members 
of the Fund for the first time during the preceding month 
together with the declarations in Form 2 furnished by 
such qualifying employees; and 
(b) in such form as the Commissioner may specify, of the 
employees leaving service of the employer during the 
preceding month: 
Provided that if there is no employee qualifying to become a 
member of the Fund for the first time or there is no employee 
leaving service of the employer during the preceding month, the 
employer shall send a ‘Nil’ return. 
(3) Every employer shall maintain an inspection note book in 
such form as the Commissioner may specify, for an Inspector to 
record his observations on his visit to the establishment. 
(4) Every employer shall maintain such accounts in relation to 
the amounts contributed to the Fund by him and by his employees 
as the Central Board may, from time to time, direct and it shall be 
the duty of every employer to assist the Central Board in making 
such payments from the Fund to his employees as are sanctioned 
by or under the authority of the Central Board. 
EMPLOYER TO FURNISH PARTICULARS OF OWNERSHIP 
Every employer in relation to a factory or other establishment to 
which the Act applies or is applied hereafter shall furnish to the 
Commissioner particulars of all the branches and departments, 


42 Labour Laws 
owners, occupiers, directors, partners, managers or any other 
person or persons who have the ultimate control over the affairs of 
such factory or establishment and also send intimation of any 
change in such particulars, within fifteen days of such change, to 
the Commissioner by registered post. 
DUTIES OF THE EMPLOYER UNDER EMPLOYEES’ PENSION SCHEME 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) Every employer shall send to the Regional Provident 
Fund Commissioner (RPFC) within three months of the 
commencement of this scheme, a consolidated return of 
the employees entitled to become members of the 
Employees’ Pension Scheme with their wages. If no 
employee is entitled, then a ‘NIL’ return should be sent to 
RPFC. 
Every employer shall send to the RPFC within fifteen days 
of the close of each month a return in respect of the 
employees leaving service during the preceding month. 
The principal employer shall ensure that every contractor 
submits to him within seven days of the close of every 
month, a statement showing the particulars in respect of 
his employees for its further submission to the RPFC. 
The employer shall prepare an Employees’ Pension Fund 
Contribution Card in respect of each employee who has 
become a member of the Employees’ Pension Fund. 
The employer shall ensure the collection of particulars 
concerning the member and his family in the prescribed 
form. 
Every employer shall furnish to the RPFC particulars of 
all the branches and departments, owners, occupiers, 
directors, partners, managers or any other person or 
persons who have ultimate control of the establishment 
and shall also send intimation of any change within 15 
days by a registered post. 
The employer shall before taking any person into 
employment, ask him/her to state in writing whether or 
not he/she is a member of the Employees’ Pension Fund 
and, if he/she is, also ask him/her to furnish a copy of 
the scheme certificate issued by the RPFC to him/her in 
respect of the past employment in terms of paragraph 12, 


The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 43 
Provisions Act, 1952 
as the case may be. If the person concerned was not in 
employment previously or had availed of return of 
contribution in respect of his/her previous employment, 
he/she shall, on demand by the employer, furnish to him, 
for communication to the RPFC, particulars concerning 
him/herself and his/her family in the prescribed form. 
MODE OF PAYMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS—SUBMISSION OF 
RETURNS/FORMS 
(1) The employer shall, before paying the member his wages in 
respect of any period or part of period for which contributions are 
payable, deduct the employee’s contribution from his wages 
which together with his own contribution as well as an 
administrative charges of such percentage of the pay, basic wages, 
dearness allowance, retaining allowance, if any, and cash value of 
food concessions admissible thereon for the time being payable to 
the employees other than an excluded employee, and in respect of 
which Provident Fund contributions are payable as the Central 
Government may fix, he shall within fifteen days of the close of 
every month pay the same to the Fund by separate bank drafts or 
cheques on account of contributions and administrative charges: 
Provided that if payment is made by a cheque on an outstation 
bank, the actual bank collection charges in respect of both the 
contributions and the administrative charges shall be included in 
the amount for which the cheque is drawn in respect of the 
administrative charges : 
Provided further that where there is no branch of the Reserve 
Bank or the State Bank of India at the station where the factory or 
other establishment is situated, the employer shall pay to the Fund 
the amount mentioned above by means of Reserve Bank of India 
(Government) Drafts at par, separately on account of contributions 
and administrative charges. 
(2) The employer shall forward to the Commissioner, within 
twenty-five days of the close of the month, a monthly consolidated 
statement, in such form as the Commissioner may specify, 
showing recoveries made from the wages of each employee and 
the amount contributed by the employer in respect of each such 
employee: 


44 Labour Laws 
Provided that an employer shall send a ‘NIL’ return, if no such 
recoveries have been made from the employees: 
Provided that in the case of any such employee who has 
become a member of the Family Pension Fund under the 
Employees’ Family Pension Scheme, 1971, the aforesaid Form 
shall also contain such particulars as are necessary to comply 
with the requirements of that Scheme. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-paragraph (2), 
in respect of such establishments as are notified by the 
Commissioner to be annually posted establishments, the employer 
shall forward to the Commissioner within twenty-five days of the 
close of each month, a monthly abstract in such form as the 
Commissioner may specify showing, inter alia, the aggregate 
amount of recoveries made from the wages of all the members and 
the aggregate amount contributed by the employer in respect of all 
such members for the month. The employer shall also send to the 
Commissioner, within one month of the close of the period of 
currency, a Consolidated Annual Contribution Statement in Form 
6A, showing the total amount of recoveries made during the 
period of currency from the wages of each member and total 
amount contributed by the employer in respect of each such 
member for the said period. The employer shall maintain on his 
record duplicate copies of the aforesaid monthly abstract and 
Consolidated Annual Contribution Statement for production at 
the time of inspection by an Inspector. 
TO MAKE ENTRY OF CONTRIBUTIONS IN THE CONTRIBUTION CARD 
The amount recovered every month from the wages of an 
employee as well as the contribution made by the employer in 
respect of each such employee shall be entered by the employer 
every month in the contribution card opened in the name of each 
member under this Scheme. 
RENEWAL OF CONTRIBUTION CARDS 
An employer shall, on or before the expiration of the period of 
currency of the contribution card prepare in respect of each 
member employed by him a card in Form 3 or Form 3A as may be 
appropriate, for the next period of currency: 
Provided that in the case of any such employee who has 
become a member of the Family Pension Fund under the 


The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 45 
Provisions Act, 1952 
Employees’ Family Pension Scheme, 1971, the aforesaid form shall 
also contain such particulars as are necessary to comply with the 
requirements of that Scheme. 
SUBMISSION OF CONTRIBUTION CARDS TO THE COMMISSIONER 
Every employer shall, within one month from the date of 
expiration of the period of currency of the contribution cards in 
respect of members employed by him, send the contribution cards 
to the Commissioner together with a statement in Form 6: 
Provided that where a member leaves service, the employer 
shall send the contribution card in respect of such member before 
the twentieth day of the month following that in which the 
member left the service : 
Provided further that in the case of any such employee who has 
become a member of the Family Pension Fund under the 
Employees’ Family Pension Scheme, 1971, the aforesaid Form 
shall also contain such particulars as are necessary to comply 
with the requirements of that Scheme. 
CUSTODY OF CONTRIBUTION CARDS 
The employer shall retain in 5 custody the contribution cards 
in respect of each member empioved by him and shall take every 
precaution against loss or damage of the contribution cards. 
INSPECTION OF CARDS BY MEMBERS 
Any member making a request in this behalf to the employer 
shall be permitted to inspect his cards himself or to have the same 
inspected by any person duly authorised by him in writing to do 
so within 72 hours of making such request provided that no such 
request shall be entertained more than once in every two calendar 
months. 
PRODUCTION OF CARDS AND RECORDS FOR INSPECTION BY THE 
COMMISSIONER OR INSPECTOR 
Every employer shall, whenever the Commissioner or any other 
officer authorised by him in this behalf or an Inspector so requests, 
either in person or by notice in writing, produce before the 
Commissioner, Officer or Inspector, as the case may be, the records 
of any member employed by him and any card then in his 
possession, and if so required by the said Commissioner, Officer 
or Inspector, shall deliver such record to the said Commissioner. 


46 Labour Laws 
OBLIGATION OF EMPLOYERS PERTAINING TO RETURNS AND TO 
CARRY OUT DIRECTIONS 
1. Every employer shall send to the Commissioner within three 
months of the commencement of this Scheme, a consolidated 
return of the employees entitled to become members of the 
Employees’ Pension Fund showing the basic wage, retaining 
allowance, if any, and dearness allowance including the cash 
value of any food concession paid to each of such employees: 
Provided that if there is no employee who is entitled to become 
a member of the Employees’ Pension Fund, the employer shall 
send a ‘NIL’ return. 
2. Every employer shall send to the Commissioner within 
fifteen days of the close of each month a return in respect of the 
employees leaving service of the employer during the preceding 
month: 
Provided that if there is no employee leaving service of the 
employer during the preceding month the employer shall send a 
‘NIL’ return. 
3. Every employer shall maintain such accounts in relation to 
the amounts contributed by him to the Employees’ Pension Fund 
as the Central Board may, from time to time direct and it shall be 
the duty of every employer to assist the Central Board in making 
such payments from the Employees’ Pension Fund to his 
employees as are sanctioned by or under the authority of the 
Central Board. 
4. Notwithstanding anything contained in this paragraph, the 
Central Board may issue such directions to the employers 
generally, as it may consider necessary or expedient, for the 
purpose of implementing the scheme, and it shall be the duty of 
every employer to carry out such directions. 
ADVANCES/WITHDRAWALS 
An employee can avail of his non-refundable withdrawals/ 
advances for construction of house, sickness, marriage of self/ 
dependents and higher education of his children ete. 


The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 47 
Provisions Act, 1952 
SCALE OF BENEFITS PAYABLE UNDER EDLI SCHEME 
DEATH CASES OCCURRING QUANTUM OF BENEFIT PAYABLE 
DURING THE PERIOD 
1. August, 1976 to February, 1990 Equal to the average balance in 
Provident Fund A/c of the member 
subject to maximum Rs. 10,000 
2. March, 1990 to March, 1993 Equal to the average balance in 
Provident Fund A/c of the member 
subject to maximum Rs. 25,000 
3. April, 1993 to June, 2000 Equal to the average balance upto 
Rs.25,000 in the Provident Fund A/c 
of the member plus 25% of the 
remaining balance, if any, subject to Rs. 
35,000 maximum 
4. July, 2000 onwards Equal to the average balance upto 
Rs. 35,000 plus 25% of the balance 
amount, if any, subject to Rs. 60,000 
maximum 
SCALES OF BENEFITS UNDER EMPLOYEES’ DEPOSIT LINKED 
INSURANCE SCHEME, 1976 
Salary Slab (upper limit), Rate of Contribution, Administrative 
Charges and Inspection Charges to be Borne by Employer 
Salary Slab Rate of Contribution | Adm. Charges | Inspection Charges 
Rs. 1,000 from 0.5% from 0.1% from 0.02% from 
1-8-1976 to 1-8-1976 1-8-1976 to 1-8-1976 to 
28-2-1983 till date 30-9-1987 31-12-1988 
Rs. 1,600 from 0.5% from 0.01% from 0.005% from 
1-3-1983 to 1-8-1976 1-10-1987 till 1-10-1989 till 
31-8-1985 till date date (min. Rs. 2 date (min. Rs. 2 
—— w.e.f. 1-6-89) 
Rs. 2,500 from —do— 
1-9-1985 to 
31-10-1990 
Rs. 3,500 from —do— —do— 
1-11-1990 to 
30-9-1994 
Rs. 5,000 from —do— —do— 
1-10-1994 to 
31-5-01 
Rs. 6,500 from —do— =jo— 
1-6-2001 till 
date 


48 Labour Laws 
BENEFITS 
On the death while in service of the member, the nominee of 
the deceased shall in addition to PF/EPS accumulation, be paid 
an amount equal to the average balance in the PF accumulation 
of the deceased for the preceding twelve months and if the 
average balance exceeds Rs. 35,000 then the amount payable 
shall be Rs. 35,000 plus 25% in excess of Rs. 35,000 subject to a 
maximum of Rs. 60,000 (Revised rates w.e.f. 1-6-2000). 
WITHDRAWAL OF ADVANCES AND THE CONDITIONS THERETO 
TYPE OF 
WITHDRAWAL 
1. Withdrawal from 
the fund for 
(Para 68-B) 
(a) The purchase of 
site for construc- 
tion of house 
(b) The construction 
of house 5 yrs. of 
membership 
of the Fund 
(Min.balance in 
member's a/c 
should be Rs.1000) 
—do— CONDITION AMOUNT 
RECEIVABLE 
(i) 24 months wages 
(Basic + D.A) 
OR 
Member’s own share 
of contributions + 
Co’s share of 
contribution with 
interest thereon 
(i) 36 months wages 
(Basic + D.A.) 
OR 
Member’s own share 
of contributions + 
Co’s share of DOCUMENT 
REQUIRED 
(Available 
once in 
lifetime) 
Original of 
Allotment 
Order (in case 
the purchase is 
through 
agency) with 
copy. 
Original to be 
returned after 
verification. 
Original Title- 
Deed (if pur- 
chase is from 
individual) 
with copy. 
Original to be 
returned after 
verification. 
Photocopy of 
the Registered 
Agreement 
with Seller 
alongwith the 
receipt of 
advance paid 
alongwith 
Original copy 
for verification 
& return. 
Same as per 
Col.(a) 
Photocopy of 
the plan 
approved by 
the Collector’s 


The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 49 
Provisions Act, 1952 
TYPE OF CONDITION AMOUNT DOCUMENT 
WITHDRAWAL RECEIVABLE REQUIRED 
' contribution with Office or 
interest thereon. Municipal 
Corporation 
or the Local 
Bodies, Gram 
Panchayat as 
the case may 
be. 
(c) The purchase —do— —do— (i) Original 
of dwelling flat Allotment 
Order (if 
purchase is 
through 
Agency) 
with copy. 
(ii) Copy of 
the Agree- 
ment with 
seller, duly 
registered 
under the 
Indian 
Registration 
Act, 1908 
(photocopy 
+ Original) 
for ver- 
ification 
and return. 
(iii) Non- 
encumbrance 
declaration 
from the 
member 
and seller. 
(iv) Receipt of 
Advance 
Payment 
towards 
Flat. 
If purchase : 
is in the 
Co-op. 
Housing 
Society, 
then 
Registration 
No. of the 
Society. = 
2nd Advance 
(d) Additions, 5 yrs. from 12 months basic or (i) Proof of 
Alterations or the date of member’s own ownership 


50 
TYPE OF 
WITHDRAWAL 
improvements 
to the dwelling 
house 
3rd Advance 
(e) —do— 
2. Withdrawal from 
the fund for repay- 
ment of loan in 
special cases to 
State Govt., 
Registered Co-op. 
Societies, State 
Housing Board, 
Nationalised 
Banks, Public 
Financial institu- 
tions, Municipal 
Corp. or Secular 
Bodies. 
Advance from the 
fund for illness viz., 
hospitalisation for 
more than a 
month, major 
surgical operation 
or suffering from 
T.B., Leprosy, 
Paralysis, Cancer, 
Heart ailment etc., 
(for member of 
family and self) Labour Laws 
CONDITION AMOUNT 
RECEIVABLE 
completion of 
dwelling house share of contributions 
with interest 
thereon. 
10 yrs. from the 
date of completion of 
the dwelling house 
10 yrs. membership 36 months wages 
of the fund and should| (Basic + D.A.) 
have Rs.1000 as OR 
employee's share Member’s own share 
of contributions + 
Co’s share of 
contributions with 
interest thereon. 
6 months wages 
(Basic + D.A.) or 
his share of PF 
whichever is less. DOCUMENT 
REQUIRED 
(ii) Details of 
addition/ 
alteration 
to be 
carried out 
alongwith 
permission 
to carry 
out addi- 
tions etc. 
(iii) Estimate 
from the 
appropriate 
authority 
Wee PE 
A certificate 
from the 
leading 
authority 
furnishing the 
details of loan 
and out- 
standing 
amount and if 
they are ready 
to accept 
premature 
payment. 
(i) A certific- 
ate from 
the Regd. 
Medical 
Practitio- 
ner, Govt. 
Doctor for 
hospitalisa- 
tion or op- 
eration. In 
case of 
serious 
diseases, of 
the specia- 
list. 
(ii) Certificate 
from 
employer 
that ESI 
benefits 


AOocrrr9s 
022953 
The Employees Provident Eunds and Miscellaneous 50A 
Provisions Act, 1952 
TYPE OF CONDITION AMOUNT DOCUMENT 
WITHDRAWAL RECEIVABLE REQUIRED 
are not 
available 
to the 
member. 
4. Advance form the | 7 yrs. membership 50% of Marriage 
fund for Marriage | of the fund and min. | member’s own share | Invitation 
of self/son/ balance of member’s | of contribution Card/declara- 
daughter/sister/ a/c should be tion of 
brother etc. Rs. 1,000 (Max.advances member. 
allowed: 3) 
5. Advance from the —do— 50% of member’s own] Certificate 
fund for education share of contribution from the 
of son/daughter (Max. advances Institution 
allowed: 3) regarding the 
course of 
study and 
anticipated 
expenditure. 
6. Grant of advance (i) Certificate Rs.5000 or 50% of Certificate 
in abnormal con- of damage member’s own from the 
dition (para 68L) share of appropriate 
Natural calamities contributions authority 
etc. within the 
State Govern- 
ment (To 
apply within 4 
months) 
(ii) State Government 
Declaration 
7. Withdrawal within | (i) He should have 90% of both Certificate by 
one year before attained the age contributions employer to 
retirement of 54 years this effect 
(ii) to retire within 
ensuing year 
8. Option for with- (i) More than 55 (i) 90% of both Proposal from 
drawal for years of age contributions LIC duly 
investment in (ii) LIC Policy for (ii) Payment to be accepted and 
Pension Beema Pension Beema made to LIC passed 
Yojana Yojana directly 
PUNISHMENT FOR CONTRAVENTION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS OF 
THE ACT 
An employer who contravenes, or makes default in 
complying with the provisions of section 6 or clause (a) of sub- 
section (3) of section 17 insofar as it relates to the payment of 
inspection charges, or paragraph 48 of the Scheme in so far as it 
LIBRARY NATIONAL LAW SCHOOL OF 
INDIA UNIVERSITY NAGADOQLIAVI ODOOMCcT DAM AIP wars 


50B Labour Laws 
relates to the payment of administrative charges, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years— 
(a) which shall not be less than one year and fine of ten 
thousand rupees in case of default in payment of the 
employees’ contribution which has been deducted by 
the employer from the employees’ wages; 
(b) which shall not be less than six months and fine of five 
thousand rupees, in any other case : 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special 
reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a lesser term. 
An employer who contravenes, or makes default in 
complying with the provisions of section 6C, or clause (a) of 
sub-section (3A) of section 17 insofar as it relates to the 
payment of inspection charges, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year but 
which shall not be less than six months and shall also be liable 
to fine which may extend to five thousand rupees : 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special 
reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a lesser term. 
OFFENCES BY COMPANIES 
(1) If the person committing an offence under the E.P.F & 
M.P. Act, the Scheme or the Family Pension Scheme or the 
Insurance Scheme is a company, every person, who at the time 
the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of 
the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly. 
Punishment for failure to submit return, etc., under Employees’ 
Pension Scheme 
If any person,— 
(a) deducts or attempts to deduct from the wages or other 
remuneration of the member, the whole or any part of 
the employer’s contribution, or 
(b) fails or refuses to submit any return, statement or other 
documents required by this Scheme or submits a false 
return, statement or other documents, or makes a false 
declaration, or 


The Employees Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 50C 
Provisions Act, 1952 
~— (c) obstructs any Inspector or other official appointed 
under the Act or this Scheme in the discharge of his 
duties or fails to produce any record for inspection by 
such Inspector or other officials, or 
(d) is guilty of contravention of or non-compliance with 
any other requirement of this Scheme, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to 
one year or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees 
or with both: 
Provided that nothing contained in the above sub-section 
shall render any such person liable to any punishment, if he 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained above, where an 
offence under this Act, the Scheme or the Family Pension 
Scheme or the Insurance Scheme has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed 
with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of any director or manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary 
or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of that offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of above provisions—- 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a 
firm and other association of individuals; and 
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 
ENHANCED PUNISHMENT IN CERTAIN CASES AFTER PREVIOUS 
CONVICTION 
Whoever, having been convicted by a court of an offence 
punishable under the E.P.F. & M.P. Act, the Scheme of the 
Family Pension Scheme or the Insurance Scheme, commits the 
same offence shall be subject for every such subsequent offence 
to imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years but 
which shall not be less than two years and shall also be liable to 
fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees. 


5A. THE EMPLOYEES’ 
PENSION SCHEME, 
1995 : oo — 
1. APPLICABILITY 
The Scheme is applicable to all factories and other 
establishments to which the Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 applies. The Scheme is meant 
for members of the Provident Funds subscribing to Employees’ 
Provident Fund Scheme, 1952 or any scheme exempted 
thereunder. 
2. MEMBERSHIP ELIGIBILITY 
(i) Membership of the scheme is compulsory for 
— All Provident Fund subscribers including those 
employed in Exempted Establishments contributing 
to the Employees’ Family Pension Scheme, 1971; and 
— All New entrants to the Provident Funds Scheme, 
1952 from 16-11-1995 onwards, automatically 
become members of the Employees’ Pension 
Scheme, 1995. 
(ii) Membership is available on Optional basis for 
— Existing members of Exempted and Un-exempted 
Provident Fund Scheme as on 15-11-1995 who are 
not members of the Family Pension Scheme, 1971. 
- Members of the Family Pension Scheme, 1971 who 
left employment between 1-4-1993 -— 15-11-1995 
whether they have withdrawn their benefits or not. 
50D 


The Employees Pension Scheme, 1995 50E 
— Beneficiaries of Family Pension Scheme, 1971 who 
have died on or after 1-4-1993. 
3. FUNDING OF THE SCHEME 
- No separate/additional contribution is payable for 
Employees’ Pension Scheme. 
— 8.33% of subscribers ‘Pay’ is being diverted from 
employers’ share of Provident Fund contributions; and 
— 1.1/6% of subscribers’ pay shall be paid by the 
Government as Government contribution. 
— Existing assets and liabilities of the ceased Family 
Pension Fund, 1971 as on 16-11-1995 will form the 
corpus of the Scheme. 
— Provident Fund accumulations upto 15-11-1995 (both 
shares with interest will remain available to members in 
toto. Likewise the balance of 1.67%/3.67% employer’s 
share of contribution in case of 10%/12% contribution 
rate will continue to remain in Provident Fund a/c of the 
member. 
4. BENEFIT PACKAGE 
The Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 provides for following 
benefit package. 
I. For Member 
(i) Pension Payment for life on  Retirement/ 
Superannuation. 
(ii) Pension Payment for life on invalidation during 
employment. 
(iii) Lump sum payment to the member by way of 
commutation of Pension upto one third pension 
amount on optional basis. 
(iv) Capital return on option formula basis upon 
cessation of members pension payment. 
II. Pension Payment to Family Members upon Death of the 
Member 
(i) To spouse for life or until remarriage. 
(ii) To children (two at a time) till they attain the age of 
25 years additionally along with pension payment to 
spouse: 
For total and permanently disabled children pension 
for life. 


50F Labour Laws 
(iii) Orphan Pension to Children at higher rate upon 
cessation of Pension Payment to Spouse, 
(iv) To Nominee/Dependent parents for life in case 
member is unmarried or having no eligible family 
member. 
The Scheme covers members death risk unconditionally - i.e. 
irrespective of whether such death occurs 
(i) while in service; 
(ii) away from employment and not contributing to the 
fund; or 
(iii) after retirement as a pensioner. 
The family members shall remain entitled for pensionary 
support uniformly. 
— The scheme, in its benefit package precisely covers as 
under: 
(i) Pension Payment to the member against 
contribution component diverted-permitting 
communication/ return of capital on option formula 
basis; and 
(ii) Complete security coverage to the family members 
for pensionary support in the event of members 
death. delinking contribution component altogether 
on a Social Insurance Pattern. 
5. SPECIAL PROVISIONS MADE IN THE SCHEME TO FACILITATE 
BENEFIT AVAILABILITY/DELIVERY FOR SEASONAL/CASUAL EMPLOY- 
EES 
— Employees engaged seasonally in any establishment, the 
period of “actual service” in any year, notwithstanding 
that such service is less than a year, shall be treated as 
full year. 
~ Pensionable salary will be worked out “Notionally” for 
full month in the event of drawal of salary for a part of 
the month. 
— Pensionary benefits shall be extended to the members 
without co-relating compliance by the employer of the 
establishment. 
SALIENT FEATURES 
In the scheme three scales of pensionary benefits have been 
offered according to the length of service. 


The Employees Pension Scheme, 1995 50G 
¢ For service below 10 years 
Return of contribution on exit from employment - Table - 
D 
Example: Suppose a member exits from employment 
after four years of service his wage on exit is Rs. 4,000. 
Return of contribution will be calculated as Rs. 4,000 x 
4.18 of wages on exit i.e., Rs. 16,720. 
¢ Service above 10 years but below 20 years 
In the first instance pension will be calculated by 
applying the formula, i.e.— 
Pensionable Salary x Pensionable service 
70 
Say, a member has done 18 years of pensionable Service. 
Pensionable Salary determined as Rs. 4,000. Pension 
payable to him will be Rs. 1029. 
¢ Service over 20 years 
Full pension according to the formula stated above. It is 
to be noted here that for rendering 20 years of 
pensionable service or more, member’s pensionable 
service shall in all cases be increased by adding 2 years. 
In other words, 20 years actual pensionable service will 
be treated as 22 yea's of pensionable service for 
calculation of pension. 
¢ Special provisions for existing members 
Special provisions have been made for calculation of 
pension in case of member who was a member of the 
ceased Family Pension Scheme 1971 and who has 
attained the age of 48 years in the 16th November, 1995 
or a member who has attained the age of 48 years but is 
less than 53 years on 16th November, 1995, member who 
has attained the age of 53 years of more on the 16th 
November, 1995. In the aforesaid cases the formula for 
calculating pension will be as follows:— 
A member who has not attained the age of 48 years on 
16-11-1995 
Pension is determined by the above formula t.e.— 
Pensionable Salary x Pensionable service 
7() 


50H Labour Laws 
For the period of pensionable service rendered from the 
16th November 1995 or Rs. 635 whichever is more plus 
past service benefits as under:— 
*The past service benefit 
payable on completion of 
58 years of age on 16-11-95 
Salary upto | Salary more than 
Rs 2,500 p.m |_ Rs. 2,500 p.m. 
Upto 11 yrs. 
More than 11 yrs. but up to 15 yrs. 
More than 15 yrs. 
Beyond 20 yrs. 
* To arrive at past service benefit, payable on the 
completion of 58 years of age on 16-11-1995 under 
column (2) & (3) above shall be multiplied by the factor 
given in Table B corresponding to the period between 
16-11-1995 and date of attainment of age 58. 
Subject to a minimum of Rs. 800 per month provided the 
past service is 24 years. If the members aggregate service 
is less than 24 years, Pension and the benefits computed 
as above will be reduced proportionately to a minimum 
of Rs. 450 per month. 
A member who has attained the age of 48 years but less 
than 53 years on 16-11-1995 
Pension as determined by the above mentioned formula 
i.€.:— 
Pensionable Salary x Pensionable service 
70 
for the period of service rendered from 16-11-1995 or 
Rs. 438 per month whichever is more plus past service 
benefit as laid down in Para 12(3) subject to a minimum 
of Rs. 5,00 per month, in case the past service is 24 years. 
If it is less than 24 years, pension payable and the past 
service benefit taken together shall be proportionately 
less subject to a minimum of Rs. 325 p.m. 
A member who has attained the age of 53 years or more 
on 16-11-1995 


The Employees Pension Scheme, 1995 50-1 
Pension as determined by the above mentioned formula 
Le: 
Pensionable Salary x Pensionable service 
70 
for the period of service rendered from 16-11-1995 till 
the date of exit or Rs. 335 p.m. whichever is more plus 
past service benefit as provided in para 12(3) subject to a 
minimum of Rs. 500 p.m. (both together) in case past 
service period is 24 years. If it is less than 24 years 
pension payable and the past service benefit shall be 
proportionately lesser subject to a minimum of Rs. 265 
p-m. 
EARLY PENSION ON CESSATION OF EMPLOYMENT 
Old age pension on account of superannuation/retirement is 
normally payable on attaining the age of 58 years. However, 
member cannot opt for taking earlier than 58 years on his exit 
from employment but under no circumstances pension will be 
payable before the age of 50 years. A member who desires to 
draw monthly pension from a date earlier than 58 years of age 
will be allowed to draw a monthly reduced pension. The amount 
of pension in such a case shall be reduced at the rate of 3% for 
every year the age falls short of 58 years. 
SCHEME CERTIFICATE 
There are occasions when a member may leave employment 
and or may move from a covered establishment to an uncovered 
establishment before he reaches the date of superannuation, he 
may opt for a Scheme Certificate. The certificate will indicate his 
pensionable salary and the amount of pension due on the date of 
exit from employment. If the member is subsequently employed 
in a covered establishment, his pensionable service in the scheme 
certificate will be taken into account for working out his full 
pensionable service. 
WIDOW PENSION 
Widow pension is of three categories (i) on the death of the 
member during service, (ii) on the death of the member after 
leaving service but before attaining the age of 58 years, and (iii) 
in case of death of the member after commencement of payment 
of monthly members pension. 


50] Labour Laws 
Widow pension on death of the member during the service is 
equal to monthly members pension. 
The essential conditions for grant of widow pension are as 
follows:— 
(a) The death of the member occurred while in service. 
(b) The member has contributed at least one month’s 
contribution. 
(c) The member had not attained the age of 58 years. 
(d) Fhe death of the member had taken place before the 
_ commencement of monthly members pension. 
Example 1: Mr. X, a worker in an establishment, became 
member of the Employees Pension Scheme on 2nd January, 1996. 
He died in February, 1996 after a short illness. His wages at the 
time of death was Rs. 1,500 p.m. He left behind his widow aged 
22 years and a child aged 1 year. What will be the widow 
pension in this case? 
It is confirmed that pension contribution for Mr. X was paid 
by the employer for the month of January, 1996. Widow Pension 
entitlement. 
(i) Pensionable service One month 
Pensionable salary Rs. 1500 
Either 
(ii) Pension according to the formula: 
Pensionable service x Pensionable Salary 
1.e. 
70 
1 1500 
x = Rs. 1.78 
12 70 
Or (ii) Minimum pension payable as per para 16(2)(a)(i) of the 
Scheme Rs. 450 p.m. 
Or (iii) The amount indicated in table ‘C’ Rs. 718 per month — 
whichever is more. 
Since (iii) is more than (i) & (ii), Widow pension will be 
fixed at Rs. 718 per month for life or remarriage of the 
widow, whichever is earlier. 
(iv) For the child, 25% of the widow pension will be granted 
as monthly pension i.e., 25% of Rs. 718 = Rs. 179.50 or 
Rs. 180 p.m., till 25 years of age. 


The Employees Pension Scheme, 1995 50K 
Example 2: Mr. ‘Y’ Joined Family Pension Scheme in January 
1972. He died while in service, say, on 30th March 1998. He was 
drawing a salary of Rs. 2,500 p.m. from January 97 till death. 
He had attained the age of 48 years at the time of his death. 
He left behind the widow, two sons-one aged 16 years, one 7 
years and one daughter aged 20 years. What would be the 
widows pension and children pension, payable? 
(i) Mr. ‘Y’ had done 26 years 3 months of pensionable 
service at the time of his death. In calculation of eligible 
‘service for pension, fraction of three months will be 
ignored as per explanation to para 9(a) of the Scheme 
and thus eligible service will be taken as 26 years only. 
The average 12 months’ salary at the time of his death 
was Rs. 2,500. Hence members monthly pension will be: 
Either 
Or 
Or Pensionable service x Pensionable Salary , 1 
70 
(i) 26 x 2500/70 = Rs. 928.57 or Rs. 929 p.m. 
(ii) In terms of para 16(2)(a)(ii) - Rs. 250 p.m. 
(iii) Table ‘C’ - Rs. 1087 - Whichever is more. 
The amount at (iii) being more than (i) & (ii), the widow 
pension payable will be Rs. 1087 for life or remarriage of 
the widow, whichever is earlier. 13; 
Children Pension 
(i) 
(ii) The member left behind three children one daughter 
aged 20 years, one son aged 16 years and the other son 
age 7 years. To start with, only the elder two, the 
daughter and the elder son will get pension. The 
daughter will get pension for 5 years by which time she 
will be 25 years of age after 5 years of the vesting of 
pension. After the daughter ceases to be the beneficiary, 
the youngest child, then aged 12 years, will start 
receiving pension till the age of 25 years. 
The amount of children pension will be @ 25% of widow 
pension for each of the two children, viz. 
25% + 25% of Rs. 1087 or Rs. 272 + Rs. 272 for two 
children. 


50L Labour Laws 
WIDOW PENSION AFTER COMMENCEMENT OF MONTHLY PENSION 
In case of death of the member after vesting of pension, the 
amount of widow pension is payable @ 50% of the monthly 
members pension subject to a minimum of Rs. 250 p.m. for 
example. Mr. ‘Z’ a pensioner, dies at the age of 66 years leaving 
behind his widow aged 62 years. 
Mr. Z drawing pension @ Rs. 1000 p.m. The widow pension in 
this case will be Rs. 500 p.m. 
In case the member leaves behind any child less than 25 years 
of age, children pension is payable for each equal to 25% of the 
widow pension subject to a minimum of Rs. 115 p.m. 
OPTION FOR RETURN OF CAPITAL 
The member may opt to draw revised pension and avail of 
return of capital under any one of the three alternatives as per 
the table shown u/p 13 of the scheme. 
SUMMARY OF BENEFITS TO EXISTING MEMBERS 
Age of Pension amount Past service till If aggregate 
employees for serviceAfter Benefit 15-11-95 service less 
as on 16-11-95 till date than 24 yrs. 
16-11-95 then the 
minimum 
MMP 
payable 
Amount Minimum| Min. Past | If PSB is less 
as per Pension Service than 24 yrs 
calculation Payable benefit 
Payable 
for 24 years 
Past service 
Upto 47yrs On propo- 
rtionate 
basis of the 
mm. PSB 
48 yrs to 52 payable or 
yrs as per 
calculation 
whichever | 
53 yrs and is more 
WITHDRAWAL BENEFIT 
If the member renders less than 10 years pensionable service 
on the date of exit or on attaining the age of 58 years, whichever 
is earlier, he is entitle for withdrawal benefit as per Table ‘D’ or 
he may opt for scheme certificate. 


The Employees Pension Scheme, 1995 50M 
The existing member, i.e. member of E.P.F. shall receive 
additional benefit for his past service under the E.P.F Scheme 
1971, as per Table ‘A’ multiplied by factor given in Table ‘B’. 
PAYMENT OF PENSION THROUGH BANKS 
The pension is disbursed through Nationalised Banks of the 
respective state. The member/pensioner are required to open an 
account in the Bank where pension is desired and indicate the 
option in the application in Form 10-D. The Statewise list of 
Banks, where pension can be opted is given below. 
REGION NOMINATED BANK REGION NOMINATED BANK 
Andhra Pradesh Andhra Bank & SBI | Maharashtra Bank of India, PNB & 
SBI 
Bihar Punjab National Bank North East Punjab National Bank 
Region (Assam)| & SBI 
Delhi Punjab National Bank Orissa Bank of India & SBI 
& SBI 
Gujarat Dena Bank & SBI Punjab Punjab National Bank 
& SBI 
Haryana Punjab National Bank Rajasthan State Bank of Bikaner 
& SBI & Jaipur, Punjab 
National Bank 
Karnataka Tamil Nadu Indian Bank & SBI 
Kerala Canara Bank & SBI Uttar Pradesh PNB & SBI 
Madhya Pradesh | Punjab National Bank West Bengal Punjab National Bank 
& SBI & Union Bank of India’ 
Himachal Pradesh} Punjab National Bank In addition HDFC, UTI & ICICI 
& SBI to above Bank for all Regions 
WITHDRAWAL BENEFIT (AS PER PARA 14 OF THE SCHEME) 
No. of | Proportion | No.of | Proportion Proportion| No. of |Proportion 
full of pay full of pay of pay full of pay 
year’s payable year’s payable payable | year’s | payable 
Contri-| at cessa- Contri- at cessa- at cessa- | Contri- | at cessa- 
bution tion of bution tion of tionof | bution | tion of 
paid member- paid member- member- | paid | member- 
(1) ship (2) (1) ship (2) ship (2) (1) ship (2) 
8.52 
8.89 
9.26 
9.64 
10.33 
10.43 
10.83 
11.24 
11.66 
12.08 ay 
CON DWH & WN 


50N Labour Laws 
FACTOR FOR COMPUTATION OF PAST SERVICE BENEFIT UNDER 
THE CEASED FAMILY PENSION SCHEME FOR EXISTING MEMBERS 
ON EXIT FROM THE EMPLOYMENT (AS PER PARA 14 OF THE 
SCHEME) 
(1) years 
Less than 1 Less than 7 Less Less 5.810 
than 13 than 19 
Less than 2 Less than 8 Less Less 6.414 
than 14 than 20 
Less than 3 Less than 9 Less Less 7.056 
than 15 than 21 
Less than 4 Less than 10 Less Less 7.761 
than 16 than 22 
Less than 5 Less than 11 Less Less 8.537 
than 17 than 23 
Less than 6 Less than 12 Less Less 9.390 
than 18 than 24 
EQUIVALENT WIDOW PENSION (AS PER PARAGRAPH 16 OF THE 
SCHEME) 
Salaray | Equivalent} Salaray | Equivalent| Salaray | Equivalent) Salaray |Equivalent 
at day widow at day widow | <¢ widow 
of death | pension of death pension | of death} pension 
not more not more 
than than 
(1) (2) (6) (8) 
Rs. Rs. 1100 578 1950 880 2800 1201 
Upto 300 250 1150 595 2000 898 2850 1221 
350 327 1200 612 2050 916 2900 1241 
400 343 1250 629 2100 935 2950 1261 
450 359 1300 646 2150 954 3000 1281 
500 375 1350 664 2200 973 3050 1301 
550 391 1400 682 2250 992 3100 1321 
600 408 1450 700 2300 1011 3150 1341 
650 425 1500 718 2350 1030 3200 1561 
700 442 1550 736 2400 1049 3250 ; 1381 
750 459 1600 754 2450 1068 3300 1401 
800 476 1650 772 2500 1087 3350 1421 
850 493 1700 797 2550 1106 3400 1441 
900 510 1750 808 2600 1125 3450 1461 
950 527 1800 826 2650 1144 3500 1481 
1000 544 1850 844 2700 1163 3550 1501 
1050 561 1900 862 2750 1182 3600 1521 


Applicability 
of the Act & 
Scheme 
ls extended area- 
wise to factories 
using power and 
employing 10 or 
more persons and 
to non-power using 
manufacturing 
units and 
establishments 
employing 20 or 
more persons upto 
Rs. 6500/- per 
month. It has also 
been extended 
upon shops, hotels, 
restaurants, road 
motor transport 
undertakings, 
equipment 
maintenance staff 
in the hospitals. Coverage Rate of of employees Contribution 
of the wages Drawing wages 
(w.e.f. 1-10-2006) 
upto 
Rs. 10,000/- per 
month engaged 
either directly or 
thru’ contractor. Employers’ 4.75% 
Employees’ 1.75% 
Manner and Time Limit 
for making payment of contribution 
The total amount of contribution 
4 (employee's share and employer's 
share) is to be deposited with the 
authorised bank through a challan in the EMPLOYEES’ STATE INSURANCE 
ACT & the SCHEME 
CHECKLIST 
prescribed Form in quadruplicate on or before 
21* of month following the calendar month in 
which the wages fall due. 
’ WAGES FOR ESI CONTRIBUTIONS 
Registers/files to be maintained by the employers. 
To be deemed as 
wages 
Basic pay 
Dearness allowance 
House rent allowance 
City compensatory 
allowance 
for determining the 
coverage of an employee) 
Payment for day of rest 
Production incentive 
bonus 
Night shift allowance 
Heat, Gas & Dust 
allowance 
holidays 
Meal/food allowance 
Suspension allowance 
Lay off compensation 
Children education 
allowance (not being 
tuition fee) 
Conveyance 
| Overtime wages (but not 
to be taken into account 
Bonus other than statutory 
Payment for unsubstituted 
reimbursement for actual NOT to be deemed 
as wages 
Contribution paid by the 
employer to any 
pension/provident fund or 
under ES! Act 
Sum paid to defray special 
expenses entailed by the 
nature of employment - 
Daily allowance paid for 
the period spent on tour. 
Gratuity payable on 
discharge 
Pay in lieu of notice of 
retrenchment 
compensation 
Benefits paid under the 
ESI Scheme 
Encashment of leave 
Payment of Inam which 
does not form part of the 
terms of employment 
Washing allowance 
Amount towards 
reimbursement for duty 
related journey Contribution THE ESI SCHEME TODAY 
No. of implemented Centres 677 
No. of Employers covered 2.38 lacs 
No. of Insured Persons 85 lacs 
No. of Beneficiaries 330 lacs a: 
. of Regional Offices/SRO's 26 
. of ESI Hospitals/Annexes 183 
. of ESI Dispensaries 1453 
. of Panel Clinics 2950 
Benefits 
to the employees under the Act 
Medical sickness, extended sickness for 
certain diseases, enhanced sickness, 
dependants, maternity, besides funeral 
expenses, rehabilitation allowance, 
medical benefit to insured person and his 
or her spouse. me 
Benefit period 
period 
1° April to 30" 
September 
1°' October to 31°" 
March lf the person joined 
insurable employment 
for the first time, say on 
5" January, his first 
contribution period will 
be from 5" January to 
31° March and his 
corresponding first 
benefit will be from 5” 
October to 31* 
December. 
Penalties 
Different punishments have been prescribed for 
different types of offences in terms of section 85 : 
(i) (six months imprisonment and fine Rs.5,000), 
(ii) (one year imprisonment and fine), and 85-A 
(five years imprisonment and not less to 2 years) and 
85-C(2) of the ESI Act, which are self-explanatory. 
Besides these provisions, action also can be taken 
under section 406 of the IPC in cases where an 
employer deducts contributions from the wages of 
his employees but does not pay the same to the 
corporation which amounts to criminal breach of 
trust 


6. The Employees State 
Insurance Act, 1948 . oO 
THE OBJECT 
The Employees’ State Insurance Act is the first major 
legislation on social security for industrial workers in India. The 
Scheme, as per provisions of the Act, is devised so as to provide 
social prote&tion to workers in contingencies such as illness, long 
term sickness or any other health risks due to exposure to 
employment injury or occupational hazards. Under the 
provisions of the scheme, medical facilities are also made 
available to the legal dependents of insured persons. Medical 
facility has also now been introduced for retired insured persons 
and permanently disabled workers and their spouses at a 
nominal contribution of Rs. 10 per month. 
The Act applies in the first instance to non-seasonal factories 
using power and employing 20 or more persons. After 
enforcement of the provisions of the Employees’ State Insurance 
(Amendment) Act, 1989, the Act is now applicable, in the first 
instance, to non-seasonal factories using power and employing 
10 or more persons and non-power using factories and 
establishments employing 20 or more persons. As of now 
employees of the covered factories and establishments earning 
wages upto Rs. 10,000 (w.e.f. 1-10-2006) per month come under 
the purview of the scheme. 
Over the last 41 years the scheme has been implemented at 
625 centres in the country in 21 States and Union Territories. The 
52 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 53 
number of factories and establishments that come under the 
purview of the scheme at present has reached a new high of 1.5 
lakh units. At an average the scheme is implemented at 15 new 
centres each year under the programme of continued extension. 
CONTINUOUS APPLICABILITY OF THE ACT 
By an amendment of the ESI Act in 1989, it has been provided 
that a factory or an establishment shall continue to be governed 
by this Act notwithstanding that the number of persons 
employed therein at any time falls below the limit specified by or 
under this Act or the manufacturing process therein ceases to be 
carried on with the aid of power. 
APPRENTICES/TRAINEES 
Under section 2(9) of the ESI Act inter alia providing that any 
person engaged as apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged 
under the Apprentices Act, 1961, or under the standing orders of 
the establishment will be covered under the Act. Even unpaid 
trainees provided with boarding and lodging will also be 
covered under the ESI. 
EMPLOYEES ENGAGED BY A CONTRACTOR 
The employees engaged by a contractor are squarely to be 
covered under ESI Act and the Scheme thereto. 
PARTNER OF A FIRM 
The Supreme Court has held that a partner engaged for the 
work of the factory or establishment and being paid monthly will 
not come within the Purview of an ‘employee’ as defined in 
section 2(9) of the ESI Act. 
MANAGING DIRECTOR 
Managing Director of a Company will be covered under the 
Act if his salary is below prescribed ceiling. 
CASUAL/TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE 
Casual or temporary employees will be liable to be covered 
under the Act from the date of their joining the service. 
COMMISSION AGENTS 
The commission agents are not coverable under the ESI Act. 
But they are employed as representatives and incurring other 
expenses besides commission, such persons are coverable under 
the provisions of ESI Act. 


54 Labour Laws 
LOADERS AND UNLOADERS 
Merely because the loaders and unloaders have not been able 
to get the benefit, it will not be a ground for non coverage under 
ESI Act. 
CONTRIBUTIONS 
The amount of contribution for a wage period shall be as 
follows:— 
(i) employer’s contribution, a sum (rounded off to the next 
of five paise) equal to four and three-fourth per cent of 
the wages payable to an employee; and 
(ii) employees’ contribution, a sum (rounded off to the next 
higher multiple of five paise) equal to one and three- 
fourth per cent of the wages payable to an employee. 
REGISTRATION OF FACTORIES OR ESTABLISHMENTS 
Section 2A of the ESI Act and Regulation 10B framed under 
the Act requires the employer to which the Act applies for the 
first time and to which an Employer’s Code Number is not yet 
allotted and the employer in respect of a factory or an 
establishment to which the Act previously applied but has 
ceased to apply for the time being, to furnish to the appropriate 
Regional Office not later than 15 days after the Act becomes 
applicable, as the case may be, to the factory or establishment, a 
declaration of registration in writing in Form 10 called the 
Employer Registration Form. The correctness of all the 
particulars and information required for and furnished on the 
Employer Registration Form is the responsibility of the 
employer. It is also the responsibility of the employer to enter the 
Employer’s Code Number on all documents prepared and 
completed by him in connection with the Act, the Rules and the 
Regulations and in all correspondence with the appropriate 
office. 
DUTY TO COMPLETE DECLARATION FORM 
It is the duty of every employer in respect of a factory or an 
establishment to require every employee in such factory or 
establishment to furnish on the appointed day correct particulars 
required for the purpose of Form 1, i.e., “Declaration Form” and 
to enter the same in the Declaration Form including the 
Temporar™: Identification Certificate and to obtain the signature 
or thumb-impression of such employee and also to complete the 
form as indicated thereon. Where, however, an Identity Card is 
produced, the employer shall make relevant entries thereon. 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 55 
SUBMISSION OF DECLARATION FORM AND RETURN IN FORM 3 
Regulation 14 requires the employer to send to the 
appropriate office by Registered Post or messenger, all 
Declaration Forms without detaching the Temporary 
Identification Certificate together with a return in duplicate in 
Form 3 within ten days of the date on which the particulars for 
the Declaration Forms were furnished. 
PROCEDURE FOR ALLOTMENT OF INSURANCE NUMBER 
On receipt of the return required under Regulation 14, the 
appropriate office is required to allot an Insurance Number to 
each person in respect of whom the Declaration Form has been 
received unless it finds that the person had already been allotted 
an Insurance Number. The Temporary Identification Certificate 
with Insurance Numbers marked thereon is then detached and 
returned to the employer along with one copy of Form 3. 
Thereafter, the employer is required to deliver the Temporary 
Identification Certificate to the employee to whom it relates after 
obtaining his signature or thumb-impression thereon except in 
the case of an employee to whom a certificate of employment has 
been issued under Regulation 17A. The Insurance Number 
allotted by the Regional/Local Office to an employee and 
indicated in the copy of Form 3 returned to the employer, shall 
then be entered by the employer in the prescribed register. 
PROCEDURE FOR REGISTRATION OF FAMILIES 
On the issue of a notification under Regulation 95A by the 
Government, specifying the date from which the family of an 
insured person shall also be entitled to medical benefit under the 
Act, every insured person who has not furnished the particulars 
of his family at the time of his registration under the Act is 
required to furnish to his employer correct particulars in respect 
of his family in Form 1A. Thereafter, the employer is required to 
enter the particulars in the form and obtain the signature or the 
thumb-impression of such person and complete the form as 
indicated thereon and send it to the appropriate office within ten 
days of the date on which the particulars were furnished to him 
by the employee. 
REGISTRATION OF CHANGES IN THE FAMILY 
After an insured person is registered, it is obligatory on his 
part to intimate all changes in the membership of his family, 
which includes the spouse and minor legitimate and adopted 
children dependent upon the insured person and his dependent 


56 Labour Laws 
parents, to the employer within fifteen days of such change 
having occurred and thereafter it is the duty of the employer to 
make entries of such particulars in Form 1B and forward it to the 
appropriate office within ten days of the date on which the 
particular of the changes were furnished to him by the insured 
person. 
DUTY TO ASSIST THE CORPORATION 
Regulation 16 makes it obligatory on the part of every 
employer to whom this Act applies to render all necessary 
assistance required by the Corporation in connection with the 
registration of his factory or establishment and the registration of 
his employees and specially for photographing such employees 
and affixing the photographs to the Identity Cards. 
IDENTITY CARDS 
It is the duty of every employer to obtain the signature or 
thumb-impression of the employee on the Identity Cards 
prepared by the Corporation in Form 4 if the employee has been 
in his service for 13 weeks and deliver the Identity Card to the 
employee after obtaining a receipt. However, if the employee has 
not been in his service for 13 weeks then such a card should not 
be issued to him and be returned to the appropriate office from 
whom it was received. In this connection, reference may be made 
to Regulation 17. 
ISSUE OF CERTIFICATE OF EMPLOYMENT 
If an insured person happens to need medical care before the 
Temporary Identification Certificate is issued to him or if issued 
he loses his Temporary Identification Certificate, it is obligatory 
on the part of the employer to issue a Certificate of Employment 
to him on demand. 
CONTINGENCIES IN WHICH CONTRIBUTION CARDS BE SENT TO 
REGIONAL OFFICE 
It is obligatory on the part of every employer being in 
possession of a Contribution Card in respect of any person to 
send it by Registered Post or messenger together with a return in 
duplicate in Form 6 to the appropriate office—(a) within seven 
days of the date on which he comes to know of the death of such 
person; (b) within seven days of the date of receipt of a 
requisition in that behalf from the appropriate office; (c) within 
42 days of the termination of the contribution period to which it 
relates; and (d) within 28 days of the date of permanent closure 
of the factory and for this purpose, the due date by which the 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 57 
evidence of contributions having been paid must reach the 
Corporation shall be the last of the days respectively specified in 
clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) above. 
DUTY TO ISSUE CERTIFICATE OF CONTRIBUTION RATE ON 
LEAVING EMPLOYMENT 
Where an insured person leaves employment during currency 
of a contribution period, it is the duty of the employer to issue a 
certificate of rate of contributions to such person and where such 
a person to whom the certificate specified above has been issued 
is employed during the currency of the contribution period and 
he furnishes the said certificate to the new employer then the 
latter is required to calculate the contributions in respect of that 
insured person for the balance of the contribution period at the 
rate indicated in such certificate. 
DUTY TO PAY INTEREST ON CONTRIBUTION DUE BUT NOT PAID 
IN TIME 
An employer who fails to pay contribution within the 
stipulated period is liable to pay interest at the rate of fifteen per 
cent per annum in respect of each day of default or delay in 
payment of contribution. 
DUTY TO MAINTAIN REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES 
Regulation 32, which deals with the maintenance of a register 
of employees, requires every employer to maintain a register in 
respect of each wage period for every employee in his factory or 
establishment showing: (a) Name; (b) Insurance No.; (c) Name of 
Dispensary; (d) Occupation; (e) Department and shift, if any; 
(f) Wage group in Schedule I to the Act to which the employee 
belongs in respect of that wage period; (g) Number of 
contribution days for which contribution fell due in the wage 
period; (h) Total contribution under the Act for the wage period; 
and (i) Employee’s share of the contribution. However, an 
employer is deemed to have complied with this requirement if in 
any register maintained by him additional particulars stated 
above are also shown. 
Note: The register referred to above is required to be preserved 
after it is filled, for a period of five years from the date of the last 
entry therein. 
MODE FOR PAYMENT OF CONTRIBUTION WHEN EMPLOYMENT IS 
BY TWO OR MORE EMPLOYERS 
Where an employee is employed by two or more employers 
successively in any week, the first employer employing him in 


58 Labour Laws 
that week is treated as his employer for the purposes of the 
provisions of the Act and the regulations relating to 
contributions and the contributions, in respect of such week shall 
fall due on the last day of employment by the first employer 
during that week. 
SCHEME BY JOINT EMPLOYERS 
Where an employee is ordinarily employed by two or more 
employers in a week, the employers of such an employee are 
entitled to frame and submit to the Corporation a scheme for the 
payment of contributions in respect of such employee for 
approval and if the same is approved then contribution in 
respect of such an employee shall be payable according to that 
scheme. 
RECKONING OF WAGES OF AN EMPLOYEE IN CASE OF TWO OR 
MORE EMPLOYERS 
Regulation 38, which deals with reckoning of wages in respect 
of an employee employed by two or more employers in the same 
period lays down that where an employee is employed by an 
employer for only a part of the period or where he is employed 
by two or more employers in a period, only the wages payable to 
him for the days upto and including the day on which the 
contribution falls due for that period shall be taken into account 
in reckoning wages for the purposes of determining the average 
daily wages of the employee for that period. 
DUTY TO FURNISH PARTICULARS IN RESPECT OF ABSTENTION OF 
AN INSURED PERSON 
Regulation 52A casts a duty on every employer to furnish to 
the appropriate office such information and particulars in respect 
of the abstention of an insured person from work for which 
sickness benefit or maternity benefit or disablement benefit for 
temporary disablement, as provided under the Act have been 
claimed or paid, in Form 25 and within such time as the said 
office may in writing require in the said form. 
DUTY TO MAINTAIN ACCIDENT BOOK 
Regulation 66 enjoins upon every employer to (i) keep an 
Accident Book in Form 15 readily accessible for entering the 
appropriate particulars of any accident causing personal injury 
to an insured person; and (ii) preserve the same when it is 
completed for a period of five years from the date of the last 
entry made therein. Regulation 67 further enjoins upon the 
employer when notice of an employment injury is given 
otherwise than by an entry in the Accident Book to make 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 59 
appropriate entry in the book in respect of the accident to which 
the notice relates immediately after such notice is received and 
where the notice is received otherwise than in writing, read over 
the particulars to the person who gives the notice and obtain his 
signature or thumb-impression on the Accident Book. 
DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT TO THE NEAREST LOCAL OFFICE 
It is obligatory on the part of every employer to send a report 
of the accident in Form 16 to the nearest Local Office and to the 
nearest Medical Officer: (i) immediately if the injury is serious, 
i.e., it is likely to cause death or permanent disablement or loss of 
a member; and (ii) in any other case within 24 hours after the 
receipt of the notice or of time when the accident came to his 
notice or to his foreman or other official under whose 
supervision the insured person was employed at the time of the 
accident or any other person designated for the purpose by the 
employer. If the injury results in death at the place of 
employment, the report to the Insurance Medical Officer and the 
Local Office should be sent through a special messenger, or 
otherwise, as speedily as may be practicable under the 
circumstances. In case such a report is made under the Factories 
Act, 1948 then it may be made in the same Form, of course, after 
giving all the additional information required under Form 16. 
Further if the injury is caused by an occupational disease 
specified in Schedule III to the Workmen’s Compensation Act 
then it shall not be necessary for the employer to send the report 
in Form 15 but the employer in such a case is required to furnish 
on demand to the appropriate Local Office, within the specified 
time such information and particulars as may be required of the 
nature of and other relevant circumstances relating to any 
employment specified in Schedule III to the Workmen’s 
Compensation Act. 
DUTY TO ARRANGE FIRST-AID 
It is the duty of every employer to arrange for such first-aid 
and medical care and transport for obtaining such aid and care 
as the circumstances of the accident may require till the injured 
person is seen by the Insurance Medical Officer and thereafter to 
get reimbursements in respect of such expenses from the 
Corporation. 
EMPLOYER TO FURNISH FURTHER PARTICULARS OF ACCIDENT 
Every employer is required to furnish to the appropriate office 
such further information and pariiculars of an accident as may 
be required and within such time as the said office may, in 
writing, require. 


60 Labour Laws 
DUTY TO REPORT DEATH IF IT IS BY EMPLOYMENT INJURY 
In case of death of an insured person as a result of an 
employment injury, it is incumbent upon every employer to 
immediately report the same to the nearest Local Office and to 
the nearest dispensary, hospital, clinic or other institution where 
medical benefit under the Act is available—(a) if the death 
occurs at the place of employment; but (b) if the death occurs at 
any other place, a dependent intending to claim dependent’s 
benefit or any other person present at such time is required to 
report the same. The position is the same with regard to the 
report of death of insured person under Regulation 95B. 
DUTY TO MAINTAIN INSPECTION BOOK 
Every principal employer is required by Regulation 120A to 
maintain a bound inspection book and be responsible for its 
production on demand by an Inspector irrespective of the fact 
whether the principal employer is present in the factory or 
establishment or not during the inspection. A note of all 
irregularities and illegalities discovered at the tume of inspection 
indicating therein the action, if any, proposed to be taken against 
the principal employer together with the orders for their remedy 
or removal is required to be sent to the principal employer by the 
Inspector and thereafter it is the duty of the principal employer 
to enter the note and orders in the inspection book and to 
maintain such book for a period of five years from the date of the 
last entry therein. 
BAR TO PUNITIVE ACTION DURING SICKNESS PERIOD 
Section 73(1) of the Act provides that no employer shall 
dismiss, discharge, or reduce or otherwise punish an employee 
during the period the employee is in receipt of sickness benefit or 
maternity benefit, nor shall he, except as provided under the 
regulations, dismiss, discharge or reduce or otherwise punish an 
employee during the period he is in receipt of disablement 
benefit for temporary disablement or is under medical treatment 
for sickness or is absent from work as a result of illness duly 
certified in accordance with the regulations to arise out of the 
pregnancy or confinement rendering the employee unfit for 
work. Sub-section (2) thereof provides that no notice of dismissal 
or discharge or reduction given to an employee during the 
period specified in sub-section (1) shall be valid or operative. The 
important words in the section are “during the period the 
employee is in receipt of sickness benefit or maternity benefit.” 
Though the clause is not very happily worded, it seems that the 
plain object of the clause is to put a sort of a moratorium against 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 61 
all punitive action during the pendency of the employee’s illness. 
If the employee is ill and if it appears that he has received 
sickness benefit for such illness, during that period of illness, no 
punitive action can be taken after the sickness period is over. 
Regulation 98 framed under the Act provides that if the 
conditions of service of any employee so allow, an employer may 
discharge or reduce on due notice an employee—(i) who has 
been in receipt of disablement benefit for temporary 
disablement, after he has been in receipt of such benefit or for a 
continuous period of six months or more; (ii) who has been 
under medical treatment for sickness or has been absent from 
work as a result of illness duly certified in accordance with these 
regulations to arise out of the pregnancy or confinement 
rendering the employee unfit for work, after the employee has 
been under such treatment or has been absent from work for a 
continuous period of six months or more; and (iii) who has been 
under medical treatment for any of the following diseases, duly 
certified in accordance with these regulations after the employee 
has been under such treatment for a continuous period of 
18 months or more, notwithstanding provisions of clauses (i) 
and (ii): 
1. Tuberculosis 
. Leprosy 
. Chronic Empyema 
. Bronchiactesis 2 
3 
A 
5. Intersistial Lung Disease 
6. HIV/AIDS 
7. Malignant Diseases 
8 . Diabetes Mellitus with proliferative ratinopathy/ 
diabetic foot/Nephropathy 
9. Monoplegia 
10. Hemiplegia 
11. Paraplegia 
12. Hemiparesis 
13. Intracranial space occupying lession 
14. Spinal Cord Compression 
15. Parkinson’s disease 


62 
16. 
tf: 
18. 
19. 
20. 
ee 
22. 
23. 
24. 
pact 
26. 
Br: 
28. 
29; 
30. 
at. 
325 
ao: 
34. Labour Laws 
Myaesthenia Gravis / Neuromuscular Dystrophies 
Immature Cataract with vision 6/60 or less 
Detachment of Retina 
Glaucoma 
Coronary Artery Disease 
(a) Unstable Angina 
(b) Myocardial Infarction with ejection less than 45% 
Congestive Heart Failure Left/Right 
Cardiac Valvular Diseases with failure complications 
Cardimyopathies 
Heart Disease with Surgical Intervention alongwith 
complications 
Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (COPD) with 
congestivem heart failure (Cor Pulmonale) 
Cirrhosis of liver with ascitie/chronic active hepatitis 
Dislocation of vertebra/prolapse of intervertebral disc 
Non union or delayed union of fracture 
Post Traumatic Surgical amputation of lower extremity 
Compound Fracture with chronic ostemyelitis 
Psychosis — the following sub-groups:— 
(a) Schizophrenia 
(b) Endogenous depression 
(c) Manic Depressive Psychosis (MDP) 
(d) Dementia 
More than 20% burns with infection/complication 
Chronic Renal Failure 
Reynaud ’s disease/Burger’s disease 
FORMS AND RETURNS 
Certain forms including returns are required to be filled and 
submitted by the employers to the ESI authorities. Forms 
generally required to be filled in by the employers are as under : 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 63 
Revised Form No. Purpose 
Form-01 and Form-01-A or Registration of factories 
Regulation 10-B(a) establishment 
Form-1 Regulation 11 & 12 Declaration by person in employ- 
ment on/after appointed day 
Form-2 Regulation 15B Changes in family 
Form-5 Reuglation 26 Return of contributions to be sent to 
appropriate Office 
Form-5A Regulation 31 Statement of contribution 
(Second proviso) 
Form-6 Regulation 32(1)(a) Register of employees 
Form-7 Regulations 57, 58, 59, 89B Medical Certificate 
Form-10 Regulations 52A(1) & (2) Abstention verification 
Form-8 Regulations 61 & 89B Intermediate medical certificate 
Form-9 Regulations 63 & 89B Claim for sickness or Temporary 
disablement 
Form-11 Regulation 66 Accident book 
Form-12 Regulation 68 Report of accident by an employer 
Form-14 Regulation 76A Submission of claims for permanent 
disablement 
Form-13 Regulations 79 & 95C Issue of death certificate 
Form-15 Regulation 80 Submission of claim for dependants 
benefit 
Form-16 Regulation 83A Submission of claims for periodical 
payments of dependents 
Form-18 Regulation 88(i)(iii) & 89 Claim for maternity benefit Form-17 Regulation 87 Notice of pregnancy 
Form-19 Regulation 88(ii), 89 & 91 
Form-20 Regulation 89A Claim for maternity benefit after the 
death of an insured woman leaving 
behind the child 
| Form-21 Regulation 89A —do— 
Form-22 Regulation 95E Claim for funeral expenses 
Form-23 Regulation 107 Certificate in respect of a person 
claiming permanent disablement 
Form-24 Regulation 107A Declaration by and certificate in 
respect of a person claiming 
dependants’ benefit 
Note: Forms are supplied free of cost by the Local Offices of ESIC. However, 
the employers have to make an intent for required number of Forms to the 
appropriate Local Office indicating therein the number of employees as covered 
under the Act. 


64 Labour Laws 
PUNISHMENT FOR FALSE STATEMENT 
Whoever, for the purpose of causing any payment or benefit 
to be made where no payment or benefit is authorised by or 
under this Act, or for the purpose of avoiding any payment to be 
made by himself under this Act or enabling any other person to 
avoid any such payment, knowingly makes or causes to be made 
any false statement or false representation, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine not exceeding two thousand rupees, or with both. 
PUNISHMENT FOR FAILURE TO PAY CONTRIBUTIONS, ETC. 
If any person— 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) fails to pay any contribution which under this Act he is 
liable to pay, or 
deducts or attempts to deduct from the wages of an 
employee the whole or any part of the employer’s 
contribution, or 
in contravention of section 72 reduces the wages or any 
privileges or benefits admissible to an employee, or 
in contravention of section 73 or any regulation 
dismisses, discharges, reduces or otherwise punishes an 
employee, or 
fails or refuses to submit any return required by the 
regulations, or makes a false return, or 
obstructs any Inspector or other official of the 
Corporation in the discharge of his duties, or 
is guilty of any contravention of or non-compliance with 
any of the requirements of this Act or the rules or the 
regulations in respect of which no special penalty is 
provided, 
he shall be punishable— 
(i) where he commits an offence under clause (a), with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months but— 
(a) which shall not be less than three months, in case of 
failure to pay the employees’ contribution which has 
been deducted by him from the employees’ wages; 
(b) which shall not be less than one month, in any other 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 65 
case, and shall also be liable to fine which may 
extend to two thousand rupees: | 
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special 
reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose a sentence of 
imprisonment for a lesser term or of fine only in lieu of 
imprisonment; 
(ii) where he commits an offence under any of the clauses 
(b) to (g) (both inclusive), with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one year, or with fine which may 
extend to four thousand rupees, or with both. 
ENHANCED PUNISHMENT IN CERTAIN CASES AFTER PREVIOUS 
CONVICTION 
Whoever, having been convicted by a court of an offence 
punishable under this Act, commits the same offence shall, for 
every such subsequent offence, be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees: 
Provided that where such subsequent offence is for failure by 
the employer to pay any contribution which under this Act he is 
liable to pay, he shall, for every such subsequent offence, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years, but which shall not be less than two years and shall 
also be liable to fine of twenty thousand rupees. 
POWER TO RECOVER DAMAGES 
(1) Where an employer fails to pay the amount due in respect 
of any contribution or any other amount payable under this Act, 
the Corporation may recover from the employer such damages 
not exceeding the amount of arrears as it may think fit to impose: 
Provided that before recovering such damages, the employer 
shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(2) Any damages recoverable under sub-section (1) may be 
recovered as an arrear of land revenue. 
The Corporation is empowered to recover damages as 
under:— 
Period of Delay in Rate of Damages on amount due 
Payment of Contribution 
2 months and above but 
less than 4 months 10% 
4 months and above but 
less than 6 months 15% 
6 months and above 25% 


66 Labour Laws 
BENEFITS TO INSURED PERSONS UNDER ESI SCHEME 
Since employees’ State Insurance Act was enacted in 1948 to 
provide certain benefits, it claims that there are to more than 4 
crore benefices. The benefits which are being provided to the 
benefices under its scheme are presently as under:— 
1. Medical treatment without any charges is offered to an 
insured person and his family from the day he enters 
into insurable employment. 
2. About 7/12th of employees normal wage will be payable 
to him by ESI during sickness. 
3. Maternity benefit for 12 weeks of which not more than 6 
weeks should be preceding confinement. 
4. Injury during/in course of employment resulting in 
temporary/permanent disablement entitles the covered 
employee to a regular payment to substitute his lost 
wages. 
5. Death during course of employment entitles specified 
dependants to a regular payment. 
6. One time payment of Rs. 3,000 to help meet funeral 
expenses of the insured person. 
TABLE OF STANDARD BENEFITS 
Sr. No. Average Daily Wagés are Standard Benefit 
Rate (in Rs.) 
os Below Rs. 28.00 14 or Full average daily 
wage whichever is less 
pe Rs. 28.00 & above but below Rs. 32.00 Rs. 16.00 
3: Rs. 32.00 & above but below Rs. 36.00 Rs. 18.00 
4. Rs. 36.00 & above but below Rs. 40.00 Rs. 20.00 
5. Rs. 40.00 & above but below Rs. 48.00 Rs. 24.00 
6. Rs. 48.00 & above but below Rs. 56.00 Rs. 28.00 
a Rs. 56.00 & above but below Rs. 60.00 Rs. 30.00 
8. Rs. 60.00 & above but below Rs. 64.00 Rs. 32.00 
9. Rs. 64.00 & above but below Rs. 72.00 Rs. 36.00 
10. Rs. 72.00 & above but below Rs. 76.00 Rs. 38.00 
a Rs. 76.00 & above but below Rs. 80.00 Rs. 40.00 
12. Rs. 80.00 & above but below Rs. 88.00 Rs. 44.00 
13. Rs. 88.00 & above but below Rs. 96.00 Rs. 48.00 
14. Rs. 96.00 & above but below Rs. 106.00 Rs. 53.00 
tbs Rs. 106.00 & above but below Rs. 116.00 Rs. 58.00 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 66A 
Sr.No. Average Daily Wages Standard Benefit 
Rate (in Rs.) 
16. Rs. 116.00 & above but below Rs. 126.00 Rs. 63.00 
47. Rs. 126.00 & above but below Rs. 136.00 Rs. 68.00 
18. Rs. 136.00 & above but below Rs. 146.00 Rs. 73.00 
19. Rs. 146.00 & above but below Rs. 156.00 Rs. 78.00 
20. Rs. 156.00 & above but below Rs. 166.00 Rs. 83.00 
rag Rs. 166.00 & above but below Rs. 176.00 Rs. 88.00 
22. Rs. 176.00 & above but below Rs. 186.00 Rs. 93.00 -: 
25. Rs. 186.00 & above but below Rs. 196.00 Rs. 98.00 
24. Rs. 196.00 & above but below Rs. 206.00 Rs. 103.00 
25. Rs. 206.00 & above but below Rs. 216.00 Rs. 108.00 
26. Rs. 216.00 & above but below Rs. 226.00 Rs. 113.00 
27. Rs. 226.00 & above but below Rs. 236.00 Rs. 118.00 
28. Rs. 236.00 & above but below Rs. 250.00 Rs. 125.00 
29. Rs. 250.00 & above but below Rs. 260.00 Rs. 130.00 
30. Rs. 260.00 & above but below Rs. 270.00 Rs. 136.00 
31. Rs. 270.00 & above but below Rs. 280.00 Rs. 140.00 
32. Rs. 280.00 & above but below Rs. 290.00 Rs. 145.00 
33. Rs. 290.00 & above but below Rs. 300.00 Rs. 150.00 
34. Rs. 300.00 & above but below Rs. 310.00 Rs. 155.00 
35. Rs. 310.00 & above but below Rs. 320.00 Rs. 160.00 
36. Rs. 320.00 & above but below Rs. 330.00 Rs. 165.00 
Sy Rs. 330.00 & above but below Rs. 340.00 Rs. 170.00 
38. Rs. 340.00 & above but below Rs. 350.00 Rs. 175.00 
39. Rs. 350.00 & above but below Rs. 360.00 Rs. 180.00 
40. Rs. 360.00 & above but below Rs. 370.00 Rs. 185.00 
41. Rs. 370.00 & above but below Rs. 380.00 Rs. 190.00 
42. Rs. 380.00 & above Rs. 195.00 
EXEMPTION FROM PAYMENT OF ESI CONTRIBUTIONS TO LOWER 
INCOME EMPLOYEES 
The employees, who are in receipt of daily wages up to and 
inclusive of Rs. 70 will not be required to pay employees share of 
contribution. However, employer’s share of contribution would 
continue to be paid. 
Temporary Disablement 40% more than _ the 
Standard Benefit Rate 
Benefit & Dependent Benefit Rate 
Maternity Benefit Rate Twice the Standard Benefit 
Rate 


66B Labour Laws 
BENEFITS, CONTRIBUTIONS CONDITIONS 
Contributory 
Conditions Benefits 
Insured Person 
should work for 
wages for 78 no. 
days in the corres- 
ponding C.P. 
(W.e.f. 19-9-1998) 1.(a) Sickness 
Benefit 
(b) Extended | In insurable emp- 
Sickness | loyment for at 
benefit least two years. 
for speci- | Should pay contri 
fied long | bution for mini- 
term dis- | mum of 156 days 
eases like | in the preceding 
TB, Lep- | 4C.P’s. 
rosy, ete. 
(c) Enhanced | Same as for Sick- 
Sickness | ness Benefit at 
Benefit (a) above 
(for 
under- 
going 
sterili- 
zation 
opera- 
tion for 
family 
Planning 
2. Disablement | No condition 
Benefit 
(employ- 
ment injury) 91 days in any 
two consecutive 
B.P. 
309 days duration 
has been extended 
beyond 400 days 
(91 days S.B. plus 
309 days (E.S.B.) t 
two years in deser 
ving cases. 
7 days for vasec- 
tomy & 14 days 
for tubectomy 
extended in cases 
of post-operative 
complications 
etc. 
In case of temp. 
disablement: as 
long as incapacity 
lasts & in case of 
permanent dis- 
ablement: for 
life time. 
Note.—Where more injuries than one are caused by the 
same accident, the rate of benefit payable under clauses 
(c) & (d) shall be aggregated but not so in any case as to 
exceed the FULL RATE and in cases of disablement not 
covered by clauses (a), (b), (c) & (d) at such rate, not 
exceeding the FULL RATE, as may be provided in the 
regulations. To Whom 
Payable 
As per Only to the insured 
S.B.R. Person. 
40% above | Only to the insured 
S.B.R. person. 
Twice the | Only to the Insured 
S.B.R. Person. 
(a) For - Only to the Insured 
temporary | Person. 
disablement 
40% above 
S.B.R. 
(b) For Permanent Total Disable- 
ment specified in PART-1 of 
2nd Schedule at the FULL 
RATE of TDB 
(c) For permanent partial Dis- 
ablement resulting from an 
injury specified in Part-II of 
the 2nd Schedule at such 
“oage of the FULL RATE as 
specified in the said schedule 
as being the %age of the loss 
of earning capacity caused by 
the injury. 
(d) For permanent partial Dis- 
ablement resulting from an 
injury not specified in Part-II 
of the 2nd schedule at such 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 66C 
Benefit Contributory Rate To Whom 
Conditions Payable 
age of the FULL RATE pay- 
able in the case of Permanent 
Total Disablement as is pro- 
portionate to the loss of earn- 
- ing capacity permanently 
caused by the injury. 
3. Dependent’s | No Condition 1. To the widow/s | 3/5 of the FULL RATE, if there 
Benefit during life time | are 2 or more widows, the 
(employ- until remarriage.| amount payable to the widow 
ment shall be divided equally between 
injury) 2. To the widowed | the widows. 
mother 
To the legitimate | 2/5 of the FULL RATE, if there 
or adopted SON /S | are 2 or more sons, the amount 
until he attains the | payable to the son shall be divi- 
age of 18 yrs. ded equally between the sons. 
Subject to min. of Rs. 14 
To the legitimate 
or adopted un- 
married Daug- 
hter/s until she 
attains the age of —vo— 
18 yrs. or until 
marriage, which- 
ever is earlier. 
(in case the de- 
ceased person 
does not leave a 
widow or legiti- 
mate or adopted 
child. D.B. shall 
be payable to...... 
(a) Parent or grand | 3/10 of the FULL RATE 
parent, for a life 
(b) Any other male | 2/10 of the FULL RATE 
dependent, 
until he attains 
the age of 18 
yrs. 
(c) Any other —Do— 
female depen- 
dent, until she 
attains the 
age of 18 yrs. or 
until marriage 
whichever is 
earlier 
Note.—An insured person whose PERMANENT DISABLEMENT has been assessed as 
final and who has been awarded permanent disablement benefit at a rate not exceeding 
Rs. 1.50 per day may apply for a lump-sum payment and such amount shall be determined 
by multiplying the daily rate of permanent disablement benefit by the figure indicated in 
Col. 2 of the Schedule III of the Regulations. 


66D 
Benefit 
4. Maternity 
Benefit 
5. Medical 
Benefit 
6. Funeral 
Expenses 
7. Rehabilita- 
tion Allow- 
ance 
8. Medical 
Benefit to 
insured 
persons who 
ceases insur- 
able employ- 
ment on 
account of 
permanent 
disablement 
9. Medical 
Benefit to 
retired Labour Laws 
Contributory To Whom 
Conditions Payable 
Payment of contri-| 12 weeks of which | Twice the | Only to the Insured 
bution for 70 days} not more than the 6] S.B.R. person. 
in one or two con-| weeks can precede | subject to 
secutive periods. | the expected date | min of Rs. 
of confinement. 20 p.d. 
6 weeks for mis- Medical to insured woman 
carriage or for bonus of or in r/o wife of I.P. 
medical termina- | Rs. 1,000 
tion of pregnancy. | where ESI 
Additional pay- hospital 
ment for one month 
for Complications 
(pre or post) arising 
out of Pregnanc facility is 
not availed 
for child 
deliver 
Full Medical] Person as well as 
care includ- | his/her family 
ing hospita- | Members as defined 
lisation u/s 2(11) of the Act. From the date of 
entry of an emp- 
loyee into an 
insurable emp- 
loyment so long 
as he remains in 
insurable emp- 
loyment and there 
after for certain 
additional period. No condition 
To the eldest survi- 
ving member of the 
family of the decea- 
sed I.P. or to the 
person who 
actually incurs the 
expenditure on the 
Funeral of an I.P. 
Only to the IP. Not more 
than Rs. 
25,000 w.e.f. 
1-10-2000 No condition 
(i.e. merely by 
virtue of being an 
insured person One time lump- 
sum payment 
No condition For each day of Double the 
which I.P. remains | Standard 
admitted in Arti- Sickness 
fical Limb Centre Benfit Rate 
for fixation, repair | but not less 
or replacement of | than full 
artificial limb. 
Till the date on 
which an L.P. 
would have 
attained the age of 
superannuation wages. 
No condition but 
an I.P. has to pay 
Rs. 10 pm in lump 
sum for one year 
in advance every 
year. Medical Benefit to 
I.P. and spouse. 
(1) Insurable emp- 
loyment for a 
period of 5 years Till the time yearly 
contribution is paid 
to the Concerned Insured person and 
his spouse. 


The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 66E 
Contributory 
Conditions 
and Office of the 
(2) Payment of Corporation. 
Contribution @ 
Rs. 10 pm in lump- 
sum for one year 
in advance, each 
year Benefit To Whom 
Payable 
Insured 
period. 
OTHER BENEFITS 
Supply of special aids: Insured persons and members of their 
families are provided artificial limbs, hearing aids, artificial 
dentures, spectacles (for insured person only) & artificial 
appliances like spinal supports, cervical collars, walking 
callopers, crutches, wheel chairs and cardiac pace makers, 
dialysis/dialysis with kidney transplant etc., as part of medical 
care under the ESI Scheme. 
AVAILABILITY OF BENEFITS-WHEN CONTRIBUTIONS ARE NOT PAID 
Non-payment of contributions won’t affect for availing of ESI 
benefits by an employee. 
DEPOSIT OF ESI CONTRIBUTION DOES NOT DEPEND ON 
DISBURSEMENT OF WAGES 
Timely payment of ESI’s contributions is the responsibility of 
the employer and does not depend upon actual disbursement of 
wages and, as such, an employer cannot escape its obligation by 
taking the plea that the Company has become sick and the 
scheme for its rehabilitation has been sanctioned by BIFR. 
|. Aids to ESI record keeping 
Rubber Stamps 
(i) Rubber stamp of about 1” size For affixing in all correspondence, 
for employer’s Code Number _ returns, forms and documents. 
(ii) Rubber stamp showing the To be affixed on the Declaration Forms, 
name and designation of the Temporary Identification Certificates, 
officer who has to countersign Return of Declaration Forms, Return of 
the various documents. Contributions, Accident Reports. 
(iii) Rubber stamp showing name, _ To be affixed on the Declaration Forms, 
address and Code No. of the Temporary Identification Certificates, 
employer. Return of Declaration Forms, Return of 
Contributions, Accident Reports etc. 


66F Labour Laws 
(iv) A rubber stamp with the word For affixing on Declaration Forms, 
‘FEMALE’ Return of Declaration Forms and other 
documents in respect of female 
employees. 
ll. Registers/Files to be maintained by Employers 
(i) Register of Employees under Regulation 32. 
(ii) Accident Book under Regulation 66. 
(iii) Inspection Book under Regulation 102A in one quire 
leather bound register. 
(iv) File for copies of Return of Declaration Forms. 
(v) File for copies of Return of Contributions, Challans, etc. 
(vi) File for general correspondence with the Regional Office 
regarding coverage, inspection, etc., and other important 
circulars. 
(vii) File for copies of Accident Reports and correspondence 
in connection therewith. 
DESIRABLE ACTION PLAN 
(i) To furnish any requisite information promptly as and when 
asked for by the Regional Office/Local Office/any other office of 
the Corporation/Scheme. 
(ii) To facilitate proper inspection of factory /establishment by 
any authorized officer of the Corporation and produce before 
him all relevant records on demand. 
(iii) To intimate the date of closure or shifting (temporary or 
permanent) of the factory /establishment, to the Regional Office / 
Local Office within seven days of its closure or shifting. 
(iv) To report any change in the business activity, ownership 
of the concern or its management. 
(v) To ascertain the liability towards ESI dues, while taking 
over the ownership of any factory/establishment by purchase, 
gift, lease or licence or in any other manner whatsoever as new 
owner is liable to discharge the past liabilities if any. 
(vi) Maintain proper sanitation for a hygienic and healthy 
environment within the workplace and in residential quarters if 
allotted to the insured persons. 


EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES 
(COMPULSORY NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES) 
ACT, 1959 CHECKLIST 
Applicability of the 
Act Object of the Act When Act is not applicable 
Any employment in agriculture, 
horticulture etc. To provide for the By notification in the 
Any employment in domestic compulsory Official Gazette, appoint : 
notification of in this behalf for such service. 
vacancies to State and different dates Any employment, the total employment may be appointed for duration of which is less than 
three months. 
Any employment to do unskilled 
office work. 
Any employment connected with 
the staff of Parliament. different States or for 
different areas of a State exchanges. 
Sec. 3 
Notification of vacancies to 
Employment Exchanges 
* Before filling up any vacancy as prescribed. 
* Employer not obliged to recruit the person through 
employment exchange. 
* To notify the vacancies to such 
employment exchanges as may 
be prescribed. Furnishing information and 
returns 
The employer in every establishment 
in public sector in that State or area 
shall furnish such information or 
return as may be prescribed in 
relation to vacancies that have 
occurred or are about to occur in that 
establishment, to such employment 
exchanges as may be prescribed. 
Sec. 5 
Time limit for notification of 
vacancies and selection 
* Atleast 15 days before the applicants will be 
interviewed or tested. 
* Employer to furnish the result of selection 
within 15 days. Submission of Returns 
* Quarterly in Form ER-I 
¢ Biennial Return in Form ER-II 
* Within 30 days by 30th June, 31st 
March, 30th September & 31st 
December. 
Rule 6 
PENALTIES 
An employer contravening the provisions of Sec. 4(1) or (2). 
Fine upto Rs.500 for first offence and for every subsequent offence fine Rs.1000. 
If any person - 
* required to furnish any information or return - 
* refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return, or 
* furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return which he knows to be false, or 
* refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to any question necessary for obtaining any information 
required to be furnished under section 5; or 
* impedes the right of access to relevant records or documents or the right of entry conferred by section 
6; he shall be punishable for the first offence with fine upto Rs.250 and for every subsequent offence 
with fine upto Rs.500. 
Sec. 7 


7. The Employment 
Exchanges (Compulsory 
Notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959 ——_____———- 
THE OBJECT 
This Act has been enacted on the recommendations of the 
Training and Employment Services Organisation Committee, 
1952. 
Compulsory notification of all vacancies to the employment 
exchanges is now required under the law. No doubt the 
notification of vacancies is compulsory but selection of workmen 
and employees still rests with the employers, who are free to call 
on other sources also. 
The Act stipulates that every establishment in public sector in 
that State or area shall, before filling up any vacancy in any 
employment in the establishment, notify that vacancy to such 
employment exchanges as may be prescribed. 
The appropriate Government may by notification in the Official 
Gazette, require that from such date as may be specified in the 
notification, the employer in every establishment in private sector 
or every establishment pertaining to any class or category of 
establishments in private sector shall, furnish such information or 
68 


The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 69 
Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 
return as may be prescribed in relation to vacancies that have 
occurred or are about to occur in that establishment to such 
employment exchanges as may be prescribed, and the employer 
shall thereupon comply with such requisition. 
The manner in which the vacancies referred to in sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (2) shall be notified to the employment 
exchanges and the particulars of employments in which such 
vacancies have occurred or are about to occur shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 
Nothing in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be deemed to impose 
any obligation upon any employer to recruit any person through 
the employment exchange to fill any vacancy merely because that 
vacancy has been notified under any of those sub-sections. 
However, the Act does not apply in relation to vacancies— 
(a) inany employment in agriculture (including horticulture) 
in any establishment in private sector other than 
employment as agricultural or farm machinery operative; 
(b) inany employment in domestic services; 
(c) in any employment the total duration of which is less 
than three months; 
(d) in any employment to do unskilled office work; 
(e) in any employment connected with the staff of 
Parliament. 
UNLESS THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT OTHERWISE DIRECTS BY 
NOTIFICATION IN THE OFFICIAL GAZETTE IN THIS BEHALF, THIS 
ACT SHALL ALSO NOT APPLY IN RELATION TO: 
(a) Vacancies which are proposed to be filled through 
promotion or by absorption of surplus staff of any branch 
or department of the same establishment or on the result 
of any examination conducted or interview held by, or on 
the recommendation of, any independent agency, such as 
the Union or a State Public Service Commission and the 
like; 
(b) Vacancies in any employment which carries a 
remuneration of less than sixty rupees in a month. 


70 Labour Laws 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
Mee ero Failure to notify vacancies 1st Offence...Fine upto 
Rs. 500, subsequent 
offence... Fine upto 
Rs. 1000. 
1st offence...Fine upto 
Rs. 250, subsequent 
offence...Fine upto 
Rs. 500 Refusing or neglecting to: 
(a) furnish the information 
or returns 
(b) furnish or cause to furnish 
any information/return, 
knowing it to be false 
~~ (c) refusing to answer or giving 
false answer, in relation to 
any information sought for 
(d) impeding the right of access 
to relevant records/documents 
or right of entry to officers 
entitled to inspect 
EMPLOYMENT EXCHANGES TO WHICH VACANCIES ARE TO BE 
NOTIFIED 
The following vacancies, namely:— 
(a) Vacancies carrying total monthly emoluments of Rs. 200 
per month or more occurring in establishment in respect 
of which the Central Government is the appropriate 
Government under the Act, and 
(b) Vacancies which an employer may desire to be circulated 
to the employment exchanges outside the State or Union 
Territory in which the establishment is situated, 
shall be notified to the Central Employment Exchange. 
Vacancies other than those specified in sub-rule (1) shall be 
notified to the local employment exchange concerned. 
FORM AND MANNER OF NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES 
The vacancies shall be notified in writing to the appropriate 
employment exchange and the following particulars shall be 
furnished, where practicable, in respect of each type of vacancy:— 


10. The Employment Exchanges (Compulsory 71 
Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959 
. Name and address of the employer. 
. Telephone number of the employer, if any : 
. Name of vacancy— 
(a) Type of work required (Designation); 
(b) Description of duties; 
(c) Qualifications required— 
(i) Essential, 
(ii) Desirable; 
(d) Age-limits, if any; 
(e) Whether women are eligible? 
. Number of vacancies— 
(a) Regular, 
(b) Temporary. 
. Pay and allowances. 
. Place of work (name of town/village and district in which 
it is situated). 
. Probable date by which the vacancy will be filled. 
. Particulars regarding interview/test of applicants— 
(a) Date of interview /test; 
(b) Time of interview /test; 
(c) Place of interview /test; 
(d) Designation and address of the person to whom 
applicants should report. 
. Whether there is any obligation or arrangement for giving 
preference to any category of persons in filling up the 
vacancies. 
Any other relevant information. 
TIME LIMIT FOR THE NOTIFICATION OF VACANCIES 
Vacancies, required to be notified to the Local Employment 
Exchange, shall be notified at least one week before the date on 
which applicants will be interviewed or tested, where interviews 
or tests are held, or the date on which vacancies are intended to be 
filled, if no interviews or tests are held. 


72 Labour Laws 
Vacancies required to be notified to the Central Employment 
Exchange, shall be notified at least three weeks before the date on 
which applicants will be interviewed or tested where interviews 
or tests are held, or the date on which vacancies are intended to be 
filled, if no interviews or tests are held. 
SUBMISSION OF RETURN 
An employer shall furnish to the Local Employment Exchange, 
Quarterly returns in Form ER-I and Biennial returns in Form ER- 
Il. Quarterly returns shall be furnished within thirty days of the 
due dates, namely 31st March, 30th June, 30th September and 31st 
December. Biennial returns shall be furnished within thirty days 
of the due date as notified in the Official Gazette. 


& EMPLOYERS LIABILITY ACT, 1938 CHECKLIST 
Extension of the Act 
The Employers’ Liability Act 
extends to the whole of India. 
a 
Defences of the Employers 
* The doctrine of common employment 
By this doctrine an employer is not normally 
liable to pay damages to a workman for an 
injury resulting from the default of another 
workman. 
° The doctrine of assumed risk 
By this doctrine an employee is presumed to 
have accepted a risk if it is such that he ought 
to have known it to be part of the risks of his 
occupation. Sec. 1(2) 
Bar on contracting out 
In a suit for damages, the strong presumption 
shall be that the workman has undertaken 
any risk attaching to the employment without 
full knowledge. But this presumption may be 
rebutted only when the employer proves that 
the risk was fully explained to and understood 
by the workman and that 
{the workman voluntarily 
undertook the same with 
full knowledge. The 
doctrine of contracting out 
has been inserted in the 
Act so as to exclude the 
provisions of the Contract Act, 1872. 
Sec. 3A 
Risk not to be deemed to have been 
assumed without full knowledge Object of the Act 
The Employers’ Liability Act was passed with the primary object of prohibiting certain defences as 
pleaded in suits for damages in respect of injuries sustained by workmen under common law. 
Close proximity with ES! Act & Workmen’s Compensation 
Act 
The Employers’ Liability Act is closely related to Chapters IV, V 
and VA of the Employees’ State Insurance Act 1948 and to 
section 3 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923. 
Definitions 
¢ Workman : A workman is a person who has 
entered into or works under a contract of service or 
apprenticeship with an employer. 
This contract of service or 
apprenticeship is for manual 
labour or clerical work or for any 
other purpose. This contract may 
be made _ expressly or by 
implication or orally or in writing. 
Sec.2(a) 
¢ Employer : Employer is generally a person who 
gives employment and directs the manner in which 
the work is to be done and exercises control and 
supervision over the work done or to be done. The 
definition of employer includes (i) any body of 
persons, whether incorporated or not, (ii) the legal 
representatives of a deceased employer. 
Where the services of a workman are 
temporarily lent or let on hire to another 
person by the person with whom 
the workman has entered into a 
contract of service or apprenticeship, 
the employer means such person to 
whom the services of the workman are lent or let on 
hire. 
Sec.2(b) 
Saving 
This Act shall not affect the validity In any such suit for damages, the workman shall not 
be deemed to have undertaken any risk attaching to 
the employment unless the employer proves that the 
risk was fully explained to and understood by the 
workman and the workman voluntarily undertook the 
same. 
Sec. 4 of any decree or order of a civil court 
passed before the commencement 
of this Act in any such suit for 
damages. 


8. The Employers’ 
Liability Act, 1938 . 
THE OBJECT 
The Act provides that certain defences shall not be raised in 
suits for damages in respect of injuries sustained by workmen. 
IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES 
“Workman” means any person who has entered into or works 
under a contract of, service or apprenticeship with an employer 
whether by way of manual labour, clerical work or otherwise, and 
whether the contract is expressed or implied, oral or in writing; 
and 
“Employer” includes any body of persons whether 
incorporated or not, any managing agent of an employer, and the 
legal representatives of a deceased employer, and, where the 
services of a workman are temporarily lent or let on hire to another 
person by the person or apprenticeship, means such other person 
while the workman is working for him. 
DEFENCE OF COMMON EMPLOYMENT BARRED IN CERTAIN CASES 
Where personal injury is caused to a workman— 
(a) by reason of the omission of the employer to maintain in 
good and safe condition any way, works, machinery or 
plant connected.with or used in his trade or business, or 
by reason of any like omission on the part of any person 
in service of the employer who has been entrusted by the 
74 


The Employers’ Liability Act, 1938 75 
employer with the duty of seeing that such way, works, 
machinery or plant are in good and safe condition; or 
(b) by reason of the negligence of any person in the service of 
the employer who has any superintendence entrusted to 
him, whilst in the exercise of such superintendence; or 
(c) by reason of the negligence of any person in the service of 
the employer to whose orders or directions the workman 
at the time injury resulted from his having so conformed; 
or 
(d) by reason of the act or omission of any person in the 
service of the employer done or made— 
(i) in the normal performance of the duties of that 
person; or 
(ii) in obedience to any rule or bye-law of the employer 
(not being a rule or bye-law which is required by or 
under any authority and which has been so 
approved); or 
(iii) in obedience to Sed instruction given by any 
other person to whom the employer has delegated 
authority in that behalf; 
a suit for damages in respect of the injury instituted 
by the workman or by any person entitled in case of 
his death shall not fail by reason only of the fact that 
the workman was at the time of the injury a workman 
of, or in the service of, or engaged in the work of, the 
employer. 
PROHIBITION FOR CONTRACTING OUT 
Any provisiori contained in a contract of service or 
apprenticeship, or in an agreement collateral thereto, shall be void 
in so far as it would have the effect of excluding or limiting any 
liability to the employer in respect of personal injuries caused to 
the person employed or apprenticed by the negligence of persons 
in common employment with him. 




YL EQUAL REMUNERATION ACT, 1976 CHECKLIST 
Object of the Act 
To provide for the payment of equal remuneration 
to men and women workers and for the prevention 
of discrimination, on the ground of sex, against 
women, in the matter of employment and for 
connected or incidental matters. 
Act to have overriding effect 
The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law or in the terms of any award, 
agreement or contract of service, whether made before 
or after this Act. Sec. 3 
No discrimination to be made 
while recruiting men and 
women workers 
* No discrimination on promotion, 
training or transfer except where 
employment of women is restricted. 
given to scheduled castes or scheduled tribes, ex- 
servicemen or retrenched employees. 
Sec. 5 
¢ When any employer 
* omits or fails to maintain any register or other 
document in relation to workers. 
* omits or fails to produce any register, muster-roll or 
other document. 
* omits or refuses to give any evidence or prevents his 
agent, servant, etc. from giving evidence, or 
omits or refuses to give any information. 
* If any employer 
* makes any recruitment in contravention to the 
provisions of the Act, or 
* makes any payment of remuneration at unequal rates 
to men and women workers, for the same work or 
work of a similar nature, or 
* makes any discrimination between men and women 
workers in contravention of the provisions of the Act, 
or 
* omits or fails to carry out any direction made by the 
appropriate Government under sub-section (5) of 
section 6. 
* Onomission or failure to produce any register or record. Duty of employer to pay equal 
remuneration to men and women workers 
for same work or work of a similar nature 
* No employer shall pay to any worker, employed by 
him in  an_ establishment or employment, 
remuneration, cash or in kind, at rates less favourable 
than those at which remuneration is paid by him to 
the workers of the opposite sex for performing the 
same work or work of a similar nature. 
* No employer shall reduce the rate of remuneration. 
* Where the rates or remuneration payable before the 
commencement of this Act for men and women 
workers for the same work or work of a similar nature 
are different only on the ground of sex, then the 
higher or the highest rate at which remuneration to be 
paid. 
Maintaining of register 
Upto date for all workers 
employed in Form D at the 
place where the workers are 
employed. Z Sec. 8, Rule 6 
Simple imprisonment upto one month or fine upto 
Rs.10,000 or both. 
ole VL Fine not less than Rs.10,000 which may extend to 
Rs.20,000 or imprisonment not less than 3 months 
which may extend upto one year for 1st offence, 
and upto two years for second and subsequent 
offences. 
Fine upto Rs.500. 


9. The Equal Remuneration 
Act, 1976 = 
THE OBJECT 
The Equal Remuneration Act provides for payment of equal 
remuneration to men and women workers and for the prevention 
of discrimination, on the ground of sex, against women in the 
matter of employment and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. Article 39 of the Constitution envisages that the 
State shall direct its policy, among other things, towards securing 
that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and women. To 
give effect to this constitutional provision the President 
promulgated on 26th September, 1975, the Equal Remuneration 
Ordinance, 1975 so that the provision of the Article 39 of the 
Constitution may be implemented in the year which was being 
celebrated as the International Women’s Year. The Act was 
passed on 11th January, 1976. 
IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES 
“Men” and “Women” mean male and female human beings 
respectively, of any age. 
“Remuneration” means the basic wage or salary, and any 
additional emoluments whatsoever payable, either in cash or in 
kind, to person employed in respect of employment or work done 
in such employment, if the terms of the contract of employment, 
express or implied, were fulfilled. 
78 


The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 79 
“Same work or work of a similar nature” means work in respect 
of which the skill, effort and responsibility required are the same, 
when performed under similar working conditions, by a man or a 
woman and the differences, if any, between the skill, effort and 
responsibility required of a man and those required of a woman is 
not of practical importance in relation to the terms and conditions 
of employment. 
“Worker” means a worker in any establishment or employment 
in respect of which this Act has come into force. 
DUTY OF EMPLOYER TO PAY EQUAL REMUNERATION TO MEN 
AND WOMEN WORKERS FOR SAME WORK OF A REGULAR 
NATURE 
(a) The employer shall pay to any worker, employed by him 
in an establishment or employment, remuneration, 
whether payable in cash or in kind, at rates less 
favourable than those at which remuneration is paid by 
him to the workers of the opposite sex in such 
establishment or employment for performing the same 
work or work of a similar nature. 
(b) No employer shall, for the purpose of complying with the 
provisions of the above reduce the rate of remuneration of 
any worker. 
(c) Where, in an establishment or employment, the rates of 
remuneration payable before the commencement of this 
Act for men and women workers for the same work or 
work of a similar nature are different only on the ground 
of sex, then the higher (in cases where there are only two 
rates), or, as the case may be, the highest (in cases where 
there are more than two rates), or such rates shall be the 
rate at which remuneration shall be payable, on and from 
such commencement, to such men and women workers: 
Provided that nothing above shall be deemed to entitle a worker 
to the revision of the rate of remuneration payable to him or her 
with reference to service rendered by him or her before the 
commencement of this Act. 
NO DISCRIMINATION TO BE MADE WHILE RECRUITING MEN AND 
WOMEN WORKERS 
On and from the commencement of this Act, no employer shall, 
while making recruitment for the same work or work of a similar 


80 Labour Laws 
nature, make any discrimination against women except where the 
employment of women in such work is prohibited or restricted by 
or under any law for the time being in force : 
Provided that the above provisions shall not affect any priority 
or reservation for scheduled castes or scheduled tribes, ex- 
servicemen, retrenched employees or any other class or category of 
persons in the matter of recruitment to the posts in an 
establishment or employment. 
DUTY OF EMPLOYERS TO MAINTAIN REGISTERS 
On and from the commencement of this Act, every employer 
shall maintain such registers and other documents in relation to 
the workers employed by him as may be prescribed. Rule 6 of the 
Equal Remunerations Rules provides that every employer shall 
maintain a register in relation to the workers employed by him in 
Form D. 
PENALTIES 
(1) If after the commencement of this Act, any employer, being 
required by or under the Act, so to do— 
(a) omits or fails to maintain any register or other document 
in relation to workers employed by him, or 
(b) omits or fails to produce any register, muster-roll or other 
document relating to the employment of workers, or 
(c) omits or refuses to give any evidence or prevents his 
agent, servant, or any other person in charge of the 
establishment, or any worker, from giving evidence, or 
(d) omits or refuses to give any information, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees. 
(2) If, after commencement of this Act, any employer— 
(a) makes any recruitment in contravention of the provisions 
of this Act; or 
(b) makes any payment of remuneration at unequal rates to 
men and women workers, for the same work or work of a 
similar nature; or 
(c) makes any discrimination between men and women 
workers in contravention of the provisions of this Act; or 


The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 81 
(d) omits or fails to carry out any direction made by the 
appropriate Government under sub-section (5) of section 
6, pertaining to issue of directions by the appropriate 
Government in respect of employment of women workers, 
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees. 
(3) If any person being required so to do, omits or refuses to 
produce to an Inspector any register or other document or to give 
any information, he shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees. 
OFFENCES BY COMPANIES 
(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was 
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well 
as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where any offence under this Act has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the 
part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall 
be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 




FACTORIES 
ACT, 1948 |] CHECKLIST 
Employer to ensure health of workers {3 Registration & Applicability of the Act pertaining to q Renewal of Factories 
Any premises whereon 10 or more as: Cleanliness ¢ Disposal of 4 To be granted by Chief 
persens with the aid of power or 20 wastes and effluents @ Inspector of Factories 
or ™ ‘e workers are/were without aid | ° Ventilation and temperature Dust and |§ On submission of 
of power working on any day fume * Overcrowding ° Artificial 4 prescribed form, fee 
preceding 12 months, wherein humidification * Lighting * Drinking water |g and plan. Manufacturing process is being 4 ¢ Spittoons é carried on. f Secs. 11 to 20 Sec.2(ii) 
* Self-acting machines. 
* Casing of new machinery. 
* Prohibition of employment 
of women and children 
near cotton-openers. 
* Hoists and lifts. Welfare Measures 
¢ Washing facilities 
° Facilities for storing and drying 
clothing. 
¢ Facilities for sitting 
¢ First-aid appliances - one first aid 
box (not less than one) for every 150 
workers 
¢ Canteens when there are 250 or 
more workers. 
¢ Shelters, rest rooms and lunch 
rooms when there are 150 or more 
workers. 
* Creches when there are 30 or more 
women workers. 
¢ Welfare office when there are 500 or 
more workers. Safety Measures 
* Fencing of machinery 
* Work on or near machinery in motion. 
* Employment prohibition of young 
persons on dangerous machines. <8 
* Striking gear and devices for cutting 
off power. 
Secs. 21 to 28 
Working Hours, Spread Over and Overtime of Adults 
* Weekly hours not more than 48. 
* Daily hours, not more than 9 hours. 
* Intervals for rest at least % hour on working for 5 hours. 
* Spreadover not more than 10% hours. 
* Overlapping shifts prohibited. 
* Extra wages for overtime double than normal rate of wages. 
* Restrictions on employment of women before 6 A.M. and beyond 7 P.M. 
Secs.51,54 to 56,59 &60 |. Secs. 42 to 49 
Annual Leave with Wages 
A worker having worked for 240 
\ 3 days @ one day for every 20 
days and for a child one day for 
working of 15 days. 
¢ Accumulation of leave for 30 days. Employment of Young Persons 
* Prohibition of employment of young children e.g. 14 years. 
* Non-adult workers to carry tokens e.g. certificate of fitness. 
* Working hours for children not more than 4% hrs. and not 
permitted to work during night shift. 
Secs. 67,68 & 71 
¢ Imprisonment upto 2 years or fine upto TW i a ANB 
. Rs.1,00,000 or both. a) | 
inuati i fee * Rs.1000 per day. > 
* On contravention of Chapter IV pertaining to safety or * Not less than Rs.25,000 in case of death. 
dangerous operations. * Not less than Rs.5,000 in case of serious injuries. 
* Subsequent contravention of some provisions. * Imprisonment upto 3 years or fine not less than 
Rs.10,000 which may extend to Rs.2,00,000. 
* Obstructing Inspectors * Imprisonment upto 6 months or fine upto 
Rs.10,000 or both. 
* Wrongful disclosing result pertaining to results of * Imprisonment of 6 months or fine upto Rs.10,000 or 
analysis both. 
* For contravention of the provisions of Secs.41B, 41C * Imprisonment upto 7 years with fine upto Rs.2,00,000 
and 41H pertaining to compulsory disclosure of and on continuation fine @ Rs.5,000 per day 
information by occupier, specific responsibility of * Imprisonment of 10 years when contravention 
occupier or right of workers to work imminent danger. continues for one year. 


10. The Factories Act, 1948 .————_—_._ _—- 
THE OBJECT 
The Factories Act, 1948, has been promulgated, primarily to 
provide safety measures and to promote the health and welfare of 
workers employed in factories. The object, thus brings this Act, 
within the competence of the Central Legislature to enact. Thus 
State Governments/Union Territory Administrations, have been 
empowered under certain provisions of this Act, to make rules, to 
give effect to the objects and the scheme of the Act. 
This Act was first enacted in 1934. Since then, it has been 
amended from time to time. The Factories (Amendment) Act, 1986 
has brought in some drastic changes in the Factories Act, 1948 
and has given it a new complexion. Its primary object is to protect 
workers employed in factories against industrial and 
occupational hazards. For that purpose, it seeks to impose upon 
the owners or the occupiers certain obligations to protect workers 
unwary as well as negligent and to secure for them, employment 
in conditions condusive to their health and safety from accidents. 
Besides, certain incidental provisions have been made for 
securing information to ensure that the objects of the Act are 
carried out. 
APPLICABILITY 
This Act applies to factories, which qualify the definition of 
“Factory”, under section 2(m) of the Act or to those industrial 
establishments, to whom section 85 have been made applicable by 
the State Government, by a notification in the Official Gazette, 
84 


The Factories Act, 1948 85 
even if the employment is less than that given in the definition 
under section 2(m). 
This Act is applicable to all factories, including those belonging 
to the Central Government or any State Government, unless 
otherwise provided and is enforceable by the State Governments/ 
UTs Administrations, through its Directorate/Inspectorate of 
Factories. 
OBLIGATIONS OF AN EMPLOYER 
An employer is under statutory obligation to safeguard the 
health and safety of workers and extends to providing adequate 
plant, machinery and appliances, supervision over workers, to 
provide healthy and safe environment, proper system of working 
and extends to giving reasonable instructions. The detailed 
provisions, are therefore, made in diverse chapters of this Act, 
imposing obligations upon the owners of the factories to employ 
staff and for maintenance of health, cleanliness, prevention of 
over-crowding and provisions for amenities such as lighting, 
drinking water, creches, etc. Provisions are also made for welfare 
of the workers, such as restrictions on working hours and on 
employment of young persons and females and grant of annual 
leave with wages. 
Undoubtedly, the Factories Act imposes numerous restrictions 
upon the employers to secure to the workers adequate safeguards, 
for their health and physical well being. But imposition of these 
restrictions cannot be regarded as unreasonable, in context of 
modern out-look on industrial relations. 
The salient features of this Act have been summarised as under, 
which may be used merely as a guideline and for proper and fair 
interpretation, it would be desirable to refer to the Act and the 
rules in case any point requires further clarification. 
CHAPTER | (PRELIMINARY) 
(i) This Act extends to the whole of India and has come into 
force w.e.f. 1-4-1949. 
(ii) Section 2 of this Act, defines “adult”, “adolescent”, 
“child”, “competent person”, “hazardous process”, 1) ieee A beta fh VS don A 
“factory”, “manufacturing process”, “worker”, “power”, 
Shame LL 
“occupier”, “week”, etc. 


86 Labour Laws 
(iii) Section 6 of the Act, requires prior approval of the CIF or 
the State Government, to be taken by the occupier of the 
factory before its construction/extension. After the 
construction, the management is required to obtain 
licence to run the factory. This licence is granted on 
payment of prescribed fees and submission of details 
prescribed under section 7 of this Act. This licence is to be 
renewed and the annual renewal fees is same as for grant 
thereof. 
CHAPTER II (THE INSPECTING STAFF) 
(i) Section 7A: General duties of the occupier, in so far as, is 
reasonably practicable and relates to health, safety and 
welfare of workers, have been detailed in section 7A of the 
Factories Act, 1948, which has been inserted vide the 
Factories (Amendment) Act, 1987 and is applicable w.e.f. 
1-12-1987. These duties include providing information, 
instruction, training and supervision, necessary for 
health and safety of workers. It also includes provisions 
for monitoring of work environment. 
(ii) Section 7B: This section prescribes general duties of 
designer, manufacturer, importer or supplier, as regards 
articles and substances for use in factories. This section is 
made applicable w.e.f. 1-6-1988. 
(ili) Sections 8 and 9: Deal with the appointment of Inspectors, 
under this Act and define their powers. The Chief 
Inspector of Factories, to be assisted by other functionaries 
such as Joint Chief Inspector, Dy. Chief Inspector and 
Inspectors. 
(iv) Section 11 (Certifying Surgeons): The State Government, 
may appoint qualified medical practitioners to be 
Certifying Surgeons. Their duties are:— 
(a) examination and certification of young persons, 
(b) examination of persons engaged in factories in 
specified dangerous operations, 
(c) medical surveillence on factory workers. 
CHAPTER Ill (HEALTH) 
This Chapter, inter alia, requires proper cleanliness, frequency 
and mode of cleaning, arrangement for disposal of trade waste 


The Factories Act, 1948 87 
and affluents, provision of proper ventilation and temperature 
conditions of reasonable comfort of worker, control of dust and 
fumes, so as to prevent its inhalation by the workers. There should 
be no overcrowding in the factory, to an extent, it may be injurious 
to their health. It is the responsibility of the occupier/manager of 
the factory to provide adequate latrines, urinals, washing points, 
drinking water points, etc. 
CHAPTER IV (SAFETY) 
To ensure safety of workers working on or around the 
machines, it is essential that all dangerous parts of machinery 
should be properly fenced with safe-guards of substantial 
construction, which shall be maintained and kept in position, 
while the machinery is in motion (section 21). This section also 
prohibits examination and lubrication of machinery while in 
motion, unless it is carried out by a trained, male adult worker, 
whose name has been recorded in the register prescribed for this 
purpose. Section 23 of this Act prohibits employment of young 
persons on dangerous machines such as presses, wood working 
machines, etc. The other sections of this Chapter deal with the 
safety of self-acting machines, casing of new machinery, 
prohibition on employment of women and children under cotton 
openers, maintenance and testing of hoists and lifts, lifting 
machines, chains, ropes, etc., revolving machines, pressure plants. 
The maintenance of floors, stairs, pits, sumps, excessive weights, 
protection of eyes, precautions against dangerous fumes, 
precautions regarding use of portable electric lights, explosive and 
flammable dusts, precautions in case of fire, are the other areas 
where safety measures to be taken, have been detailed. The safety 
requirements also extend to maintenance and safety of buildings. 
In addition to these requirements, all factories ordinarily 
employing 1000 workers or more are required to employ such of 
safety officers, as may be prescribed in the State rules. The duties, 
qualifications and conditions of service of safety officers, have 
been prescribed under the State Factory Rules. 
CHAPTER IVA (PROVISIONS RELATING TO HAZARDOUS 
PROCESSES) 
This Chapter exclusively deals with the safety and work- 
environment in hazardous process industries. The provisions of 
this Chapter and definition of “Hazardous Process”, under 


88 Labour Laws 
section 2(cb), were inserted, vide the Factories (Amendment) Act, 
1987. All these amendments except section 41F and the Second 
Schedule are applicable w.e.f. 1-12-1987, whereas section 41F and 
the Second Schedule are applicable w.e.f. 1-6-1988. The salient 
features of this Chapter are:— 
(a) Section 41A: Constitution of a Site Appraisal Committee to 
consider applications for grant of permission for the 
initial location of a factory, involving hazardous process 
or an expansion of any such factory. 
(b ~— Section 41B: Compulsory disclosure of information by the 
occupier.— 
It shall be the duty of the occupier to— 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) disclose information regarding dangers, including 
health hazards and measures to overcome such 
hazards arising out of hazardous substances, to the 
Chief Inspector of Factories, local authority and the 
general public in the vicinity; 
prepare health and safety policy. It also applies to 
non-hazardous and non-dangerous operations of 
factories employing 100 or more workers, without the 
aid of power or 50 or more workers, with the aid of 
power; 
furnish information on hazardous waste; 
prepare on-site emergency plan, detailing safety 
measures to be taken in the event of an accident 
taking place; 
assist the District Emergency Office, in preparation of 
off-site Emergency Plan and _ preparation of 
information to be furnished to general public; 
collection, development and dissemination of 
information in the form of Material Safety Data Sheet 
(MSDS) and labelling of containers of hazardous 
substances. 
(c) Section 41C: Specific responsibility of the occupier in 
relation to hazardous processes: — 
(i) to maintain accurate and upto date medical record of 
the workers; 


(d) 
(e) 
(g) The Factories Act, 1948 89 
(ii) to appoint qualified, experienced and competent 
supervisors to supervise handling of hazardous 
substances; 
(iii) pre-employment and post-employment medical 
examination of workers, at regular intervals. 
Sections 41D and 41E: These sections empower the Central 
Government to appoint an Enquiry Committee, in 
extraordinary situations and to prescribe safety 
standards, wherever the same have not been prescribed. 
Section 41F: Permissible limits of exposure of chemical and 
toxic substances have been prescribed under the Second 
Schedule. These limits are applicable, whether the 
industry is hazardous or not. 
Section 41G: Workers participation in Safety 
Management.— 
“Safety Committees”, are required to be set up, comprising 
of representatives of management and workers, to 
promote better co-operation. This requirement also 
applies to non-hazardous, non-dangerous operation 
factories employing more than 250 workers in factories in 
Delhi. 
Section 41H: Right of workers to warn about imminent 
danger.— 
This section empowers workers to bring to the notice of 
the occupier, manager or incharge, directly or through the 
Safety Committee, any situation where there is a 
likelihood of imminent danger to human life and to 
simultaneously bring to the notice of the Inspector of 
Factories. 
CHAPTER V (WELFARE) 
The prominent requirements of this Chapter are to provide— 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) Separate and adequate washing facilities for male and 
female; 
Facilities for storing and drying of wet clothes; 
Facilities for sitting for workers obliged to work normally 
in standing position; 
First-Aid Box under the charge of a trained first-aider; 


90 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vil) 
(viii) 
(ix) Labour Laws 
Ambulance Room for factory ordinarily employing more 
than 500 workers; 
Canteen of prescribed standards, in factories ordinarily 
employing more than 250 workers, to be run on no-profit 
basis by a duly constituted Canteen Managing 
Committee; : 
Suitable and adequate Rest Shelter or a Rest Room and 
Lunch Room to be provided in factories, ordinarily 
employing more than 150 workers. However, this 
provision shall not be required, if canteen according to 
section 46 has been provided; 
Creche of prescribed standards for use of children below 6 
years of age of women workers, employed in factories 
ordinarily employing more than 30 women workers. Such 
creche should be under the charge of a trained woman; 
Factories ordinarily employing 500 or more workers, are 
required to appoint a Welfare Officer, whose duties, 
qualifications and conditions of service are prescribed 
under the State Factory Rules. 
CHAPTER VI (WORKING HOURS OF ADULT) 
An “adult” has been defined under section 2(a) of the Factories 
Act and would mean a person, who has completed 18 years of 
age. The salient provisions relating to adult workers, are given 
here as under: 
(i) 
(ii) Weekly holiday on the first day of the week, which is 
Sunday or may be any other day, as may be approved in 
writing by the Chief Inspector of Factories, for a particular 
area. There is a provision for substitution of weekly 
holiday, under section 52, so that by complying with the 
requirements of this section, workers may be permitted to 
work on the day of weekly holiday. Also provision for 
allowing compensatory holiday, in lieu of unavailed 
weekly holiday; 
Work for not more than 48 hours a week and not more 
than 9 hours a day. The spread-over should not exceed 
10-1/2 hours, unless exempted by the Chief Inspector. A 
rest interval of at least half an hour should be provided, in 
such a way that no period of work shall exceed 5-1/2 
hours. (Reference sections 51, 53, 54, 55 and 56); 


(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) 
(ix) 
(x) The Factories Act, 1948 91 
Overlapping of shifts is not permitted, unless exemption 
obtained from the Chief Inspector of Factories; 
A worker, who works in a factory for more than 9 hours 
on any day or more than 48 hours in a week, is entitled, 
for the overtime work, wages at the rate twice the ordinary 
rate of wages, in accordance with section 59; 
Double employment of a worker is prohibited under 
section 60; 
The notice of period of work, fixed in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter is required to be displayed in 
the factory. Any proposed change should be notified to 
the Inspector, before the change is made. Prior permission 
of the Inspector is required, if the last change was less 
than a week old and if a factory works in more than one 
shift, in groups according to their nature of work. For 
further details, reference may be made to section 61; 
It is statutorily required under section 62 to maintain a 
Register of adult workers, in accordance with this section. 
This register should be available at all the times, on 
demand by the Inspector. No adult worker is required or 
allowed to work in the factory, unless his name and 
particulars have been recorded in the register. The hours 
of work should correspond with the notice of period of 
work, fixed under section 61 and register of adult workers 
maintained under section 62; 
Section 64 gives powers to the State Government to 
declare persons holding position of supervision or 
management or employed in confidential position. Such 
persons are exempted from provisions of Chapter VI, 
relating to working hours, except section 66(1)(b), which 
prohibits employment of women between 7.00 p.m. to 6.00 
a.m.; 
Section 64 empowers the State Governments to make rules 
for adult workers providing for exemptions to an extent 
and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed in the 
rules under this section. These rules are to be framed 
within the frame work given under this section; 
Section 65 gives powers to the State Government to grant 
exemptions to deal with the exceptional pressure of work, 
within the parameters detailed in this section; 


92 
(xi) Labour Laws 
Section 66 imposes further restrictions on employment of 
women, such as, not permitted to work between 7.00 p.m. 
to 6.00 a.m. However, the Chief Inspector is empowered to 
grant relaxation, but in that case women are not permitted 
to work between 10.00 p.m. to 5.00 a.m. Also women 
workers cannot be exempted from the provisions of 
section 54 relating to daily hours of work. 
CHAPTER Vil (EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS) 
The young persons have been defined as “child” or 
“adolescent”. A child is one, who has not completed 15 years of 
age and an adolescent is one, who has completed 15 years, but not 
completed 18 years of age. 
The following are the prominent requirements of this 
Chapter:— 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) A child worker, who has not completed 14 years of age is 
not permitted to work in a factory (section 67); 
Non-adult workers are required to carry certificate of 
fitness granted by the Certifying Surgeon which should be 
in the custody of the factory manager, declaring the 
person fit to work as an adult or child worker, with token 
(giving reference to such a certificate) to such young 
person. The Certifying Surgeon, after examination may 
grant a certificate to work as a child, if completed 14 years 
of age and attained prescribed physical standards, and fit 
for such work. But if the young person has completed 15 
years and is fit for full day’s work in the factory, he may 
be granted certificate of fitness to work as an adult. The 
validity of certificate is 12 months and renewal thereafter, 
and can be revoked, in certain circumstances. The fees for 
grant of certificate is payable by the occupier and is not 
recoverable from the worker (sections 68 and 69); 
An adolescent, who has been granted the certificate of 
fitness to work as an adult, shall be deemed to be an 
“adult”, for all purposes of the Chapters VI and VII, 
except that such adolescent, who has not completed 17 
years of age is permitted to work between 7.00 p.m. and 
6.00 a.m. But an adolescent, who has not been granted a 
certificate of fitness, shall be deemed to be a child for all 
purposes of the Act (section 70); 


The Factories Act, 1948 93 
(iv) The working hours of child workers are limited to 4 '/, 
(v) 
(vi) hours a day, with prohibition to work during night (10.00 
p-m. to 6.00 a.m.). The spread-over should not exceed 5 
hours, without any overlapping of shifts, restricted to two 
shifts only. Female child workers are prohibited to work 
between 7.00 p.m. and 8.00 a.m. (section 71); 
The requirements of (a) display of notice of period of 
work, (b) maintenance of register of child workers, and 
(c) working hours to correspond with the notice of period 
of work are also applicable to child workers, similar to 
those applicable to adult workers (sections 72, 73 and 74); 
If an Inspector is of the opinion that either the young 
person is working in a factory without certificate of fitness 
or is not fit to work in the capacity stated therein, he may 
direct the manager to get him examined from the 
Certifying Surgeon, whose decision shall be final 
(section 75). 
CHAPTER Vill (ANNUAL LEAVE WITH WAGES) 
(i) 
(ii) The provisions of this Chapter do not apply, if a worker, 
under any award, agreement (including settlement) or 
contract of service, is entitled to leave with wages, which 
are more favourable. It also does not apply to workers of 
the factories of Railways and the Government, who are 
governed by leave rules approved by the Central 
Government (section 78). 
An adult worker is entitled to leave with wages, in the 
subsequent calendar year, if he has worked for 240 days 
or more in a calendar year. Such leave is calculatable as 
under: 
(a) One leave for 20 days actual working, in case of an 
adult; 
(b) One leave for 15 days actual working, in case of a 
child; 
(c) The period of lay off, maternity leave in case of female 
and the leave earned in the year prior to which it is 
enjoyed shall be deemed to be days on which the 
worker has worked, for the purposes of computation 
of 240 days, to become eligible for leave with wages, 
but shall not earn leave for those days; 


94 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) Labour Laws 
(d) For a worker, whose services commence, otherwise 
than 1st of January, the person shall be entitled to 
leave, if he has worked for more than 2/3rd of 
number of days in the remainder of calendar year, 
even if it is less than 240 days; 
(e) In case of discharge, dismissal, superannuation, 
death or any other mode of quitting service, the 
person is entitled to leave, even if he has not worked 
for a minimum of 240 days or a minimum of 2/3rd of 
the remainder of calender year, which is the eligibility 
criteria, as laid down and detailed above. The 
payment in lieu of such leave, should be paid within 
2 months, from the date of superannuation or death 
or on the next working day, in other cases of 
discharge; 
(f) While calculating the days of leave, Sundays and 
holidays should be excluded, whether occurring 
during or at the end of leave period. 
A fraction of leave of 1/2 day or more, is to be treated as 
one leave. 
The unavailed leave in a calendar year can be carried 
forward in the next year, but such a carryforward should 
not exceed 30 days for adult or 40 days for child worker. 
However, leave refused in accordance with this Chapter, 
can be carried forward without any limit. 
A notice of minimum 15 days is required to be given, from 
the date of commencement of leave in non-public utility 
services. However, for public-utility services, it shall be a 
minimum of 30 days. The notice period is not necessary, 
in case it is availed to cover period of sickness. 
Leave cannot be taken for more than 3 times in a year. 
There is a provision under which a scheme may be drawn 
up in agreement, with the Works Committee or workers 
representatives, regulating the manner of grant of leave 
with a view to ensure continuity of work. Such a scheme 
may be lodged in writing with the Chief Inspector, with a 
copy displayed on the Notice Board and shall remain in 
force for 12 months from the date of applicability. There is 
a provision for renewal with or without modifications. 


(vili) 
(ix) 
(x) 
(xi) The Factories Act, 1948 95 
An application for leave, which does not contravene the 
provisions of this Chapter, cannot be refused. 
The unavailed leave cannot be taken into consideration, 
while calculating notice period, in case of discharge or 
dismissal. 
The rate of leave with wages shall be calculated on the 
basis of his average earning during the month, preceding 
the month, in which leave has been allowed. The rate of 
wages shall be exclusive of any overtime or bonus. If leave 
is for 4 or more days for adult or 5 days or more for child, 
there is provision of payment of leave in advance 
(sections 80 and 81). 
The leave due but not paid, is recoverable as delayed 
wages, under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936. 
CHAPTER IX (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) 
The special provisions pertain to the following matters:— 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) Powers to the State Government to apply any or all 
provisions of the Act to any place, even if the number of 
workers is less than 10 with power or 20 without power, 
in the manufacturing process (section 85). 
Powers to exempt Public Institutions maintained for the 
purposes of education, training, research, etc. (section 86). 
Powers to State Government, to declare certain processes, 
as dangerous processes, which are likely to expose any 
worker to serious risk of bodily injury, poisoning or 
disease and to frame rules, prescribing additional welfare 
facilities, supply of personal protective employment, 
periodical medical examination of workers, special safety 
laws, in such processes (section 87). 
An accident in a factory, which causes death or bodily 
injury, resulting in absence from place of work for 48 
hours or more, is a reportable accident under the Act and 
should be reported to the Inspector, in the manner 
prescribed in the State Factory Rules (section 88). 
All dangerous occurrences of the nature prescribed in the 
State Factory Rules, such as failure of a lifting machine, 
etc. are required to be reported (section 88A). 


96 Labour Laws 
(6) The cases of workers attracting occupational diseases 
specified in the Third Schedule, are required to be notified 
to the prescribed authorities (section 89). 
(7) Section 90 gives powers to the State Governments to order 
an enquiry in cases of accidents or workers attracting 
occupational diseases. 
(8) The procedure for taking of sample by an Inspector has 
been detailed in section 91. 
(9) Section 91A empowers the expert organisations such as 
DGFASLI (Directorate General of Factory Advice Services 
and Labour Institutes), besides the Chief Inspector of 
Factories to carry out occupational health surveys. 
REGISTERS, NOTICES, RETURNS AND REPORTS UNDER THE 
FACTORIES ACT, 1948 
REGISTERS REQUIRED TO BE MAINTAINED UNDER THE 
FACTORIES ACT, 1948 
1. | Form6 __| Register of Hygrometer (Humidity Register) 2. | Form7 ___| Registerof White Washing 3._| Form 7A __| Register of Tight Cloths provided 4 | Form9 __| Register of Compensatory Holidays | 5. | Form10___|_ Register of Overtime for exempted workers 6. | Form12___| Register of Adult Workers 
8. | Form 15 9. | Forms 24&25 | MusterRolk9 Register of Accident & Dangerous Occurrence 
ACTS TO BE DONE OR MAINTAINED 
Change of Name of Manager/Occupier as and . | Form 3 
when required 
= — 
Ol] | Q | NM 
Report of Examination of Vessels. 
Notice of Periods of Work for Adult Workers 
Eee hee Notice of Periods of Work for Child Labour 
ae Notice of Accident and Dangerous Occurrence 
to be submitted within 24 hours by Registered 
Post. 


8. |Form 21 Annual Return ending 31* December. 
Half yearly return by 30" June. 
10. | Form 31 Accident Annual Return by 1 Week of 
February — Rule 107(4). 
Form 34 Monthly Return only for Hazardous 
Report of Hoist of Lifts. Form 18A Notice of Accident and Dangerous Occurrence 
not resulting in bodily injury. 
7. | Form 19 Notice of Accident and Dangerous Occurrence 
(Poisoning or Disease). The Factories Act, 1948 97 
Happenings. | 
Renewal of Annual Fees to Reach to the 
prescribed office. 
CHAPTER X (PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) General penalty for offences under the Act is provided 
under section 92, according to which save as is otherwise 
expressly provided in the Act, the occupier and manager 
shall be guilty of an offence, which is punishable with 
imprisonment upto 2 years or fine upto One Lakh Rupees 
or both. In case the contravention is continued, after 
conviction, it may extend to Rs. 1,000 per day. In case of 
contravention of Chapter IV or section 87 or rules made 
thereunder, the minimum fine is Rs. 25,000, in case of 
death or Rs. 5,000 in case of accident, causing serious 
bodily injury. 
Enhanced penalty after previous conviction has been 
prescribed under section 94, which provides for 
imprisonment upto 3 years or with a fine upto Rupees 
Two lakhs or both, with a minimum fine of Rs. 10,000. In 
case of death or accidents causing serious bodily injury, 
the minimum fine shall be Rs. 35,000 and Rs. 10,000 
respectively. 
Penalty for obstructing an Inspector, has been prescribed 
under section 95, which may extend to imprisonment 
upto 6 months or a fine upto Rs. 10,000 or both. 
Penalty for contravention of provisions of sections 41B, 
41C, and 41H, may extend to an imprisonment upto seven 
years, fine upto Rupees 2 lakhs or both. In case of 


98 
(5 — 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) Labour Laws 
continued offences, the fine may extend upto Rs. 5,000 per 
day. 
Penalties for (a) wrongful disclosure of results of analysis, 
(b) offences by workers, (c) penalty for using false 
certificate of fitness, and (d) penalty for permitting double 
employment of child, have been prescribed under sections 
96, 97, 98, and 99 of the Act. 
The liabilities of the owner of the building for certain 
common facilities, have been detailed under section 93. 
Limitation of Prosecution is 6 months for not obeying a 
written order of the Inspector and in other cases, it is 3 
months. 
The presumption as to employment, onus as to age and 
onus of proving limits of what is practicable, etc., have 
been detailed under sections 103, 104 and 104A 
respectively. 
The procedure for bringing to the court, another person, 
whom the occupier/manager, charges to be the actual 
offender, has been detailed under section 101 of the Act. 
In case the charge is proved, such a person shall be 
convicted of the offence. 
CHAPTER XI (SUPPLEMENTAL) 
The supplementary provisions have been listed and briefly 
described as under: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) Appeals -Section 107 
Display of notices -Section 108 
Service of Notices -Section 109 
Submission of annual and 
Half-yearly returns -Section 110 
Obligations and rights of workers __-Sections 111 and 111A 
No charge for facilities and 
convenience -Section 114 
Protection of persons acting 
under this Act -Section 117 
Restriction of disclosure of 
information on manufacturing 
process by Inspector -Section 118 


(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) The Factories Act, 1948 99 
Restriction on disclosure of 
source of complaint 
General powers to make Rules 
Powers of the Central Government 
to give directions to State 
Government 
Publication of the draft of the ~ 
rules before adoption 
Over-riding effect of this Act, 
in case of any inconsistency 
with any provision of the 
Contract Labour (Regulation 
and Abolition) Act, 1970 -Section 118A 
-Section 112 
-Section 113 
-Section 115 
-Section 119 




INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947 
CHECKLIST 
Object of the Act 
Provisions for investigation and settlement of industrial disputes and for certain other purposes. 
important Clarifications 
* Industry - has attained wider meaning 
than defined except for domestic 
employment, covers from barber shops to 
big steel companies. Power of Labour Court to give Appropriate 
Rellef Right of a Workman during 
Pendency of Proceedings In High 
Court 
Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal can 
modify the punishment of dismissal 
or discharge of workmen and give 
appropriate relief including 
reinstatement. Employer to pay last drawn wages to 
reinstated workman when proceedings 
challenging the award of his reinstatement 
are pending in the higher Courts. 
Sec.17B Sec.2(j) 
* Works Committee - Joint Committee with 
equal number of employers and employees’ 
representatives for discussion of certain 
common problems. Sec.3 
* Conciliation - is an attempt by a third 
Party in helping to settle the disputes. 
Sec.4 
* Adjudication - Labour Court, Industrial 
Tribunal or National Tribunal to hear and 
decide the dispute. Secs.7, 7A &7B Sec.11A 
Persons Bound By Settlement Period of Operation of Settlements and Awards 
* When in the course of conciliation 
proceedings etc., all persons 
working or joining subsequently. 
* Othemise than in course of settlement 
upon the parties to the settlement. + Asettlement for a period as agreed Cs 
by the parties, or oD 
+ Period of six months on signing of settlement. 
« An award for one year after its enforcement. Sec.19 
Lay off and Payment of 
Compensation - 
Conditions for Laying off 
Failure, refusal or inability of an 
employer to provide work due to 
* Shortage of coal, power or raw 
matenal. 
* Accumulation of stocks. 
* Breakdown of machinery. 
* Natural calamity. Prohibition of Strikes and Lock Outs 
* Without giving to the employer notice of strike, as hereinafter provided, within six 
weeks before striking. 
* Within fourteen days of giving such notice. 
* Before the expiry of the date of strike specified in any such notice as aforesaid. 
* During the pendency of any conciliation proceedings before a conciliation officer 
and seven days after the conclusion of such proceedings. 
+ During the pendency of conciliation proceedings before a Board and seven days 
after the conclusion of such proceedings. 
* During the pendency of proceedings before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal and two months, after the conclusion of such proceedings. 
+ During the pendency of arbitration proceedings before an arbitrator and two 
months after the conclusion of such proceedings, where a notification has been 
issued under sub-section (3A) of section 10A. 
* During any period in which a settlement or award is in operation, in respect of 
any of the matters covered by the settlement or award. Secs. 22 & 23 
SR ACSRARIBOIES PES Notice of Change 
21 days by an employer 
to workmen about 
changing the conditions 
of service as provided jn 
\V Schedule. v 
Sec.9A 
Prior Permission for 
Lay off Lay off Compensation 
Payment of wages except for 
intervening weekly holiday 
compensation 50% of total or 
basic wages and DA for a period 
of lay off upto maximum 45 days 
in a year. Sec.25-C When there are more 
than 100 workmen 
during preceding 12 
months. Sec.25-M Recognition of 
Protected 
Workman Conditions of service etc. to remain unchanged 
under certain circumstances during pendency of 
: proceedings 
* Not to alter to the prejudice of workmen 
concemed the condition of service. 
* To seek express permission of the concemed Prior Permission by 
the Government for One percent of the 
total number of Retrenchment of Workmen 
Compensation and Retrenchment authority by paying one month's wages on workmen employed 
Conditions + When there are more dismissal, discharge or punish a protected therein subject to a * Workman must have q@>, than 100 (in UP 300 or workman connected with the dispute. minimum number of 
worked for 240 days. %& more) workmen during * To seek approval of the authority by paying one five and maximum of 
* Retrenchment preceding 12 months. month’s wages before altering condition of service, 100 workmen. 
compensation * Three months’ notice or dismissing or discharging or punishing a Sec. 33(4) 
@15 days’ wages for wages thereto. workman. Sec. 33 
every completed year to be * Form QA UME rere 
* Compensation @15 
days’ wages. 
Sec. 25-N calcUated at last drawn wages 
* One month’s notice or wages in 
lieu thereof. 
* Reasons for retrenchment 
* Complying with principle of ‘last 
come first go’. 
* Sending Form P to Labour 
Authorities Closure of an Undertaking 
* 60 days’ notice to the labour authorities for 
intended closure in Form QA. 
Sec.25FFA 
* Prior permission at least 90 days before in Form O 
by the Government when there are 100 or more 
workmen during preceding 12 months (in UP 300 
or more workmen) Sec.25-0 Prohibition of unfair labour practice either 
by employer or workman or a trade union as 
stipulated in Fifth Schedule 
Both the employer and the Union can be punished. 
Sec. 25-T Secs. 25F & 25G 
PENALTIES : ; 
= Offence > < Punishment A x ee : Sec. 25-U os AN Committing unfair labour practices Imprisonment upto 6 months or with fine upto Rs.3,000. 
Cc risonment upto one month or with fine upto Rs.50 (Rs.1000 for lock-out) & Sec. 26 p ow, Megal strike and lock-outs pei both. ee : 
Sec. 27 IN instigation etc. for illegal strike or lock-outs Imprisonment upto 6 months or with fine upto Rs.1,000 : 
& 
Sec. 28 Giving financial aid to illegal strikes and lock-outs Imprisonment for 6 months or with fine upto Rs.1,000 i 
Breach of settlement or award = Imprisonment upto 6 months or with fine. On continuity of offence fine upto i 
Sec. 29 Rs. 200 per day. i 
Sec. 0 Disclosing confidential information pertaining to Sec.21__ Imprisonment upto 6 months or with fine upto Rs. 1,000 | : i 
Sec. 31A Closure without 60 days’ notice under Sec.25FFA Imprisonment upto 6 months or with fine upto Rs.5,000 | i 
et BER Soe hgh ae a R= RR eee ce ae ee | in ol mn LES Contravention of Sec.33 pertaining to change of conditions of Imprisonment upto 6 months or fine upto Rs. 1,000 | - ‘ 
Sec. 31 service during pendency of dispute etc. | ' 
When no penalty is provided for contravention. Fine upto Rs. 100 i 
| & et come | ame tees | ee eee | geet et oe! es VT cececacaneadiaasheacicahciatiadasdassistdssbbdiissidssddbssdbsdddsstaliis 


11. The Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 ———- 
THE OBJECT 
The Preamble of the Act states that it aims at bringing in 
conflicts between employer and employee to an amicable 
settlement and at the same time it makes provisions for some of the 
other problems that may arise from time to time in an industrial or 
commercial undertaking which came within the purview of the 
definition of ‘industry’ as defined by section 2(j) of the Act. The 
Act does not discourage collective bargaining so long as the 
industrial peace is not disturbed or normal working is not 
disrupted. Notwithstanding that, should there be any difficulty or 
any problem arises under the provisions of the Act, the machinery 
set up may be approached so that industrial peace may be 
maintained and sustained without any one having to resort to 
illegal strike or lock-outs. The Act provides for payment of 
compensation to the workmen on account of retrenchment or lay 
off and closure. It also lays down the procedure for prior 
permission of the appropriate Government for laying off or 
retrenching the workers or closing down an_ industrial 
establishment in which not less than one hundred workmen were 
employed on an average per day for the preceding twelve months. 
Furthermore, the amended Act lays down unfair labour practices 
on the part of an employer or a trade union or the workers. 
The Industrial Disputes Act is a benign measure which seeks to 
pre-empt industrial tensions, provide the mechanics of dispute- 
102 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 103 
resolutions and set up the necessary infrastructure so that the 
energies of partners in production may not be dissipated in 
counter-productive battles and assurance of industrial justice may 
create a congenial climate. 
IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS 
i. “closure” means the permanent closing down of a place 
of employment or part thereof [section 2(cc)]. 
It is only “the permanent closing down” of a place of 
employment that can be taken to be closure. However, closure may 
be partial also. Therefore, it is not necessary that the whole 
establishment is closed for the purposes of the definition. 
ui. “Conciliation Officer’ means a conciliation officer 
appointed under this Act [section 2(d)]. 
A Conciliation Officer is appointed under section 4 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act. Conciliation Officers are charged with the 
duty of mediating in and promoting the settlement of industrial 
disputes. 
iii. “industry” means any business, trade, undertaking, 
manufacture or calling of employers and includes any 
calling, service, employment, handicraft, or industrial 
occupation or avocation of workmen [section 2 (j)]. 
The definition of industry is exhaustive and comprehensive. 
The Supreme Court in its landmark judgment of Bangalore Water 
Supply and Sewerage Board v. Rajappa, 1978 Lab & 1C 467: AIR 
1978 SC 548: 36 FLR 266: 1978 (1) LLJ 349, has widened the scope 
of the definition and broad principles are given below:— 
(a) Establishments Run Without Profit Motive 
Absence of profit motive or gainful objective is 
irrelevant, be the venture in the public, private or other 
sector. 
(b) Undertakings Governed by a No-profit-no-loss Rule, 
Statutorily or otherwise Fastened 
Section 2(j) of the Act uses words of very wise 
denotation, a line would have to be drawn in a fair and 
just manner so as to exclude some callings, services or 
undertakings. 
Clubs or Other Organisations Whose General Emphasis ts Not 
on Profit-making But Fellowship and Self-service (c —" 


104 Labour Laws 
(i) Professions (ii) Clubs (iii) Educational institutions 
(iv) Co-operatives (v) Research institutes (vi) 
Charitable Projects and (vii) other kindred 
adventures, if they fulfil the triple tests listed above, 
cannot be exempted from the scope of section 2(j) of 
the Act. 
iv. “Industrial Dispute” means any dispute or difference 
between employer and employees, or between employers 
and workmen, or between workmen and workmen, which 
is connected with the employment or non-employment or 
the terms of employment or with the conditions of labour, 
of any person [section 2 (k)]. 
The scope of definition of ‘industrial dispute’ is very wide. The 
words ‘employment and non-employment’ in the definition are of 
widest amplitude and have been put in juxtaposition to make the 
definition comprehensive. Any dispute connected with 
‘employment or non-employment’ constitutes the subject matter of 
one class of industrial disputes. The matters which can form 
subject matter of industrial dispute are enumerated in Second, 
Third and Fourth Schedule given at the end of the Act. 
v. “Lock-out” means the temporary closing of a place of 
employment or the suspension of work, or the refusal by 
an employer to continue to employ and number of 
persons employed by him [section 2 (1)]. 
vi. “Retrenchment” means the termination by the employer 
of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, 
otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of 
disciplinary action, but does not include— 
(a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or 
(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of 
superannuation if the contract of employment 
between the employer and the workman concerned 
contains a stipulation in that behalf; or 
(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result 
of the non-renewal of the contract of employment 
between the employer and the workman concerned 
on its expiry or of such contract being terminated 
under a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; 
or 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 105 
(c) termination of the service of a workman on the 
ground of continued ill-health [section 2(o)]. 
vii. “Settlement” means a settlement arrived at in the course 
of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at 
otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceedings 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties 
thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy 
thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this 
behalf by the appropriate Government and_ the 
conciliation officer [section 2(p)]. 
There are two categories of a settlement, one is arrived at in the 
course of conciliation proceedings and the other is a written 
agreement between the employer and the workman arrived at 
otherwise than the course of conciliation proceeding. The legal 
implications of these settlements are different. A settlement arrived 
at in the course of conciliation binds all the present and future 
workmen as specified in section 18(3) of the Act. The other kind of 
settlement binds only the actual parties to the agreement as per 
provisions of section 18(1) of the Act. 
viii. “Strike” means a cessation of work by a body of persons 
employed in any industry, acting in combination or a 
concerted refusal, or a refusal under a common 
understanding, or any number of persons who are or 
have been so employed to continue to work or to accept 
employment [section 2(q)]. 
The word “strike” has been going constant transformation 
around the basic concept of stoppage of work or quitting of work 
by employees in their economic struggle with capital. In order to 
constitute strike in its technical sense it is necessary that there 
should be cessation of work but it is not necessary that there must 
be total suspension of work because even partial stoppage of work 
would be strike. Thus cessation of work for short duration will 
also be strike. The term “concert” as used in the definition means 
“to accord together”. Thus an individual who absents himself to 
enforce a demand for higher wages shall not constitute “strike”. 
The term “strike” postulates three main ingredients, namely— 
(i) plurality of workmen, (ii) cessation of work or refusal to do 
work, and (iii) combined or concerted action. ‘Go-slow’ would not 


106 Labour Laws 
technically be a “strike” though go-slow tactics also are generally 
resorted to by the workers for compelling the employer to yield to 
their demands. The workers have got the right to strike but there is 
no such right to adopt ‘go-slow’ tactics which are more 
reprehensible in character than strike. 
ix. “Workmen” means any person (including an apprentice) 
employed in any industry to do any manual, unskilled, 
skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory 
work for hire or reward, whether the terms of employment 
be express or implied, and for the purpose of any 
proceeding under this Act in relation to an industrial 
dispute, includes any such person who has_ been 
dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection with, 
or as a consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal, 
discharge or retrenchment has led to that dispute, but 
does not include any such person— 
(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 1950, or the Army 
Act, 1950, or the Navy Act, 1957, or 
(ii) who is employed in the Police service or as an officer 
or other employee of a prison, or 
(ili) who is employed mainly in a managerial or 
administrative capacity, or 
(iv) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity 
draws wages exceeding one thousand six hundred 
rupees per mensem or exercises, whether by the 
nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason 
of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a 
managerial nature [section 2 (s)]. 
Whether an employee of an industry is a ‘workman’ or not the 
designation given to him is not decisive. What determines the 
status is the consideration of the nature of duties or the functions 
assigned to him. 
The first part of the definition gives the statutory meaning of 
‘workman’, and includes an apprentice or any person employed 
in an ‘industry’ to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, 
operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward. The 
second part is designed to include something more in what the 
term primarily denotes. By this part of the definition persons 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 107 
(i) who have been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in 
connection with an industrial dispute; or (ii) whose dismissal, 
discharge or retrenchment has led to an industrial dispute; for the 
purposes of any proceedings under the Act in relation to such 
industrial dispute, have been included in the definition of 
‘workman’ by section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act. 
AUTHORITIES UNDER THE ACT FOR INVESTIGATION AND 
SETTLEMENT OF INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES 
The Act provides following statutory authorities and vests in 
them necessary powers to investigate the disputes and to bring 
about settlement of such disputes arising between the employees 
and employers:— 
(i) Works Committee; 
(ii) Conciliation Officers; 
(iii) Boards of Conciliation; 
(iv) Courts of Inquiry; 
(v) Labour Courts; 
(vi). Industrial Tribunals; 
(vii) National Tribunals. 
WORKS COMMITTEE 
The Act provides for setting up of Works Committees in 
factories employing 100 or more workers. The composition of 
Works Committees is to be bipartite—consisting of equal number 
of workers’ representatives as well as the employers’ 
representatives. The representatives of the workers shall be elected 
from the various groups, categories and classes of workmen in 
consultation with their registered union, if any, but they are to be 
elected departmentally by workers. It will be an obligation of an 
employer to enquire from registered Trade Unions of the workers 
employed in the industry, the number of its/their total 
membership and its distribution in departments. The Works 
Committee will promote measures for securing and preserving 
unity and good relations between the employers and workmen 
and to that end to comment upon matters of their common interest 
or concern and to endeavour to compose any material difference of 
opinion in respect of such matters. 


108 Labour Laws 
BOARD OF CONCILIATION 
The Board of Conciliation is to consist of an independent 
Chairman and two or four other members representing the parties 
in equal number. 
ADJUDICATION OF INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES 
If despite efforts of the Conciliation Officer, no settlement is 
arrived at between the employer and the workmen, the Act 
provides for a three-tier system of adjudication, viz. Labour Court, 
Industrial Tribunal and National Tribunal, each having its own 
sphere of functions as allocated to each. 
Schedule II of the Act refers specifically to section 7 of the Act. 
That section lays down that the appropriate Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute one or more Labour 
Courts for adjudication of industrial disputes relating to any 
matter specified in the Second Schedule and for performing such 
other functions as may be assigned to them under this Act. 
INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNALS 
The Industrial Tribunals may be constituted by appropriate 
Government as and when necessary for adjudication of industrial 
disputes relating to any matter, whether specified in the Second or 
Third Schedule. Thus the Industrial Tribunals have jurisdiction 
over the matters over which the Labour Courts have jurisdiction 
and specifically over those mentioned in the Third Schedule, 
namely:— 
(i) Wages, including the period and mode of payment; 
(ii) Compensatory and other allowances; 
(iii) Hours of work and rest intervals; 
(iv) Leave with wages and holidays; 
(v) Bonus, profit-sharing, provident fund and gratuity; 
(vi) Shift-working otherwise than in accordance with 
Standing Orders; 
(vii) Classification by grades; 
(viii) Rules of discipline; 
(ix) Rationalisation; 
(x) Retrenchment of workmen and closure of establishment; 
and 
(xi) Any other matter that may be prescribed. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 109 
POWERS OF THE LABOUR COURT/INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL TO 
MODIFY THE PUNISHMENT OF DISMISSAL OR DISCHARGE 
Section 11A of the Act gives wide powers to the Labour Court 
and the Industrial Tribunal, etc., not only to reappraise the 
evidence to find out whether the finding of guilt of a workman 
recorded in the domestic enquiry is correct or not, but also to see 
whether the punishment inflicted is in proportion to the gravity of 
the proved misconduct or it is so severe that it has to be altered. It 
can interfere with the orders of discharge or dismissal of a 
workman and can impose lesser punishment or even set aside. 
NOTICE OF CHANGE IN CONDITIONS OF SERVICE 
Section 9A of the Act prohibits a unilateral action on the part of 
the employer to change the conditions of service to the prejudice of 
the workmen. This affords an opportunity to the workmen to 
consider the effect of the proposed change and, if necessary, to 
present their point of view on the proposal and such consultation 
would further serve to stimulate a feeling of common joint interest 
of the management and workmen. It is pertinent to refer to section 
9A which reads as under:— 
“No employer, who proposes to effect any change in the 
conditions of service applicable to any workman in 
respect of any matter specified in the Fourth Schedule, 
shall effect such change— 
(a) without giving to the workmen likely to be affected by 
such change a notice in the prescribed manner of the 
nature of the change proposed to be effected; or 
(b) within twenty-one days of giving such notice: 
Provided that no notice shall be required for effecting 
any such change— 
(a) Where the change is effected in pursuance of any 
“settlement or award”; or 
(b) where the workmen likely to be affected by the change 
are persons to whom the Fundamental and 
Supplementary Rules, Civil Service (Classification, 
Control and Appeal) Rules, Civil Services (Temporary 
Service) Rules, Revised Leave Rules, Civil Service 
Regulations, Civilians in Defence Service 
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules or the 


110 Labour Laws 
Indian Railways Establishment Code or any other 
rules or regulations that may be notified in this behalf 
by the appropriate Government in the Official 
Gazette, apply.” 
POWER OF THE GOVERNMENT TO REFER A DISPUTE FOR 
ADJUDICATION 
Section 10 of the Act provides that where the appropriate 
Government is of the opinion that any industrial dispute exists or 
is apprehended, it may, at any time, by order in writing— 
(a) refer the dispute to a Board for promoting a settlement 
thereof; or 
(b) refer any matter appearing to be connected with or 
relevant to the dispute, to a court for enquiry; or 
(c) refer the dispute or any matter appearing to be connected 
with or relevant to the dispute, if it relates to any other 
matter specified in the Second Schedule or the Third 
Schedule, to a Tribunal for adjudication. 
It may further be noted that — 
(i) the Government may refer a dispute relating to any matter 
in the Second or Third Schedule to a Labour Court, if such 
dispute is not likely to affect more than one hundred 
workmen; 
(ii) ina dispute relating to public utility service when a notice 
of a strike or lockout has been given under section 22 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, unless the notice has been 
frivolously or vexatiously given, the appropriate 
Government shall, if it thinks that it would be expedient 
to do so, make a reference under sub-section (1) of 
section 10. 
(1) It is the Central Government alone which can refer a 
dispute involving any question of national importance or 
affecting industrial establishments situated in more than 
one State, to a National Tribunal whether or not it is the 
appropriate Government in relation to that dispute or any 
matter relating to that dispute irrespective of its nature, 
i.e., Whether it is specified in the Second or the Third 
Schedule [sub-section (14) of section 10]. 


(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 111 
The appropriate Government cannot refuse to refer a 
dispute, whether jointly or separately applied for by the 
parties in the prescribed manner, to any of the prescribed 
authorities under the Acct, if it is satisfied that the persons 
applying represent the majority of each party [sub-section 
(2) of section 19]. 
The appropriate Government has power to prohibit the 
continuance of any strike or lock-out in connection with 
such dispute when it has been referred to any of the 
prescribed authorities [sub-section (3) of section 10]. 
The appropriate Government must specify in the order 
referring an industrial dispute, the points of the dispute 
for adjudication, and the Labour Court, Tribunal or the 
National Tribunal, as the case may be, shall have to 
confine its adjudication to these points and the matters 
incidental thereto [sub-section (4) of section 10]. 
If the appropriate Government while referring a dispute, 
is of the opinion that the dispute is of such a nature that 
any other establishment, group or class of establishments 
of similar nature is likely to be interested in, or affected by 
such dispute, it may, at the time of making the reference, 
or at any time thereafter but before the submission of the 
award, include in that reference such establishment, 
group, etc., whether or not at the time of such inclusion 
any dispute exists or is apprended in such establishment 
or group, etc. [sub-section (5) of section 10]. 
Notwithstanding any provisions in the Act, no Labour 
Court, or Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate 
upon any matter which is under adjudication before the 
National Tribunal. 
(a) Accordingly if the matter referred to the National 
Tribunal is also pending in a proceeding before a 
Labour Court or Tribunal, it will be deemed to have 
been quashed as such reference being made to the 
National Tribunal; 
(b) It will also be unlawful for the Government to refer a 
matter under adjudication before the National 
Tribunal, to any Labour Court or Tribunal for 
adjudication [sub-section (6) of section 10]. 


112 Labour Laws 
(7) When any industrial dispute in relation to which the 
Central Government is not the appropriate Government, 
is referred to the National Tribunal, then notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Act, any reference in section 15, 
section 17, section 33A, section 33B, and section 36A to 
the appropriate Government is to be construed as a 
reference to the Central Government, but save as aforesaid 
and as otherwise expressly provided in the Act, any 
reference in other provision of the Act to the appropriate 
Government in relation to that dispute shall mean a 
reference to the State Government. 
However, the Government is not bound to refer all the demands 
put forward to it. The Government has discretion to refer some of 
them and refuse others for reasons stated in writing. The 
Government is not also bound to refer the whole dispute or the 
dispute in all aspects as raised by the parties. 
REFERENCE OF DISPUTES TO ARBITRATION 
There is also a provision for voluntary reference to arbitration. 
A reference under section 10A(1) is not the act of the appropriate 
Government but the act of the parties themselves. The parties to an 
agreement under section 10A proceed on the footing of an existing 
or apprehended industrial dispute and cannot thereafter raise an 
objection that there was no industrial dispute between the parties. 
In order to constitute a valid reference to arbitration the following 
conditions must be satisfied:— 
(a) there must exist an industrial dispute or there must be an 
apprehension of such a dispute; 
(b) the employer and the workmen involved in such dispute, 
or apprehending such dispute must mutually agree to 
refer the dispute to arbitration; 
(c) such voluntary reference must be made before the dispute 
has been referred under section 10 of the Industrial 
Disputes Act to a Labour Court or Tribunal or National 
Tribunal; 
(d) the agreement to refer the dispute must be in writing and 
in the form as prescribed for the purpose and must be 
signed by the parties in such manner as prescribed; 
(e) a copy of the arbitration agreement must be sent to the 
appropriate Government and the Conciliation Officer; 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 113 
(f) the appropriate Government must within one month from 
the date of the receipt of such copy, publish the same in 
the Official Gazette. 
Section 10A cannot be applied to an arbitration agreement 
which does not comply with sub-sections (2) and (3) thereof 
which have been analysed in (c), (d) and (e) above. 
ILLEGAL STRIKES 
A strike or lock-out in contravention of the provisions of section 
22 or 23 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 is declared illegal by 
section 24 of the said Act. A distinction has been made in this 
respect by the Act between public utility service and any other 
industrial establishment. Section 24 of the Act describes as to 
when the strikes or lockouts are illegal. Section 25 provides that 
no person shall knowingly expend or apply any money in direct 
furtherance or support of any illegal strike or lock-out. Section 26 
lays down the penalty for illegal strikes and lock-out while section 
27 prescribes the penalty for instigation of illegal strike or lock- 
out. Section 28 provides the penalty for giving financial aid to 
illegal strikes and lock-outs. 
PROHIBITION OF STRIKES AND LOCK-OUTS 
1. No person employed in a public utility service shall go on 
strike in breach of contract— 
(a) without giving to the employer notice of strike, as 
hereinafter provided, within six weeks before striking; 
(b) within fourteen days of giving such notice; or 
(c) before the expiry of the date of strike specified in any 
such notice as aforesaid; or 
(d) during the pendency of any conciliation proceedings 
before a Conciliation Officer and seven days after the 
conclusion of such proceedings. 
2. No employer carrying on any public utility service shall 
lock-out any of his workmen— 
(a) without giving them notice of lock-out as hereinafter 
provided, within six weeks before locking out; or 
(b) within fourteen days of giving such notice; or 
(c) before the expiry of the date of lock-out specified in 
any such notice as aforesaid; or 


114 Labour Laws 
(d) during the pendency of any conciliation proceedings 
before a Conciliation Officer and seven days after the 
conclusion of such proceedings. 
_ The notice of lock-out or strike under this section shall not 
be necessary where there is already in existence a strike, 
or as the case may be, lock-out in the public utility service, 
but the employer shall send intimation of such lock-out or 
strike on the day on which it is declared to such authority 
as may be specified by the appropriate Government either 
generally or for a particular area or for a particular class 
of public utility services. 
The notice of strike referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
given by such number of persons to such person or 
persons and in such manner as may be prescribed. 
The notice of lock-out referred to in sub-section (2) shall be 
given in such manner as may be prescribed. 
If on any day an employer received from any person 
employed by him any such notices as are referred to in 
sub-section (1) or gives to any persons employed by him 
any such notices as are referred to in sub-section (2), he 
shall within five days thereof report to the appropriate 
Government or to such authority as that Government may 
prescribe, the number of such notices received or given on 
that day (section 22). 
GENERAL PROHIBITION OF STRIKES AND LOCK-OUTS 
No workman who is employed in an industrial establishment 
shall go on strike in breach of contract and no employer of any 
such workman shall declare a lock out— 
(a) 
(b) 
(bb) during the pendency of conciliation proceedings before a 
Board and seven days after the conclusion of such 
proceedings; 
during the pendency of proceedings before a Labour 
Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal and two months 
after conclusion of such proceedings; 
during the pendency of arbitration proceedings before an 
arbitrator and two months after the conclusion of such 
proceedings, where a notification has been issued under 
sub-section (3A) of section 10A; or 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 115 
(c) during any period in which a settlement or award is in 
operation, in respect of any of the matters covered by 
settlement or award (section 23). 
ILLEGAL STRIKES AND LOCK-OUTS 
1. A strike or a lock-out shall be illegal if— 
(i) It is commenced or declared in contravention of 
section 22 or section 23; or 
(ii) It is continued in contravention of an order made 
under sub-section (3) of section 10 or sub-section (4A) 
of section 10A. 
2. Where a strike or lock-out in pursuance of an industrial 
dispute has already commenced and is in existence at the 
time of the reference of disputes to a Board, an arbitrator, a 
Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal or National Tribunal, 
the continuance of such strike or lock-out was not at its 
commencement in contravention of the provisions of this 
Act or the continuance thereof was not prohibited under 
sub-section (3) of section 10 or sub-section (4A) of section 
10A. 
3. A lock-out declared in consequence of illegal strike or a 
strike declared in consequence of an illegal lock-out shall 
not be deemed to be illegal (section 24). 
PENALTY FOR ILLEGAL STRIKES AND LOCK-OUTS 
1. Any workman who commences, continues or otherwise 
acts in furtherance of a strike which is illegal under this 
Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees, or with both. 
2. Any employer who commences, continues, or otherwise 
acts in furtherance of a lock-out which is illegal under 
this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one month, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 
(section 26). 
PENALTY FOR INSTIGATION ETC. 
Any person who instigates or incites others to take part in, or 
otherwise acts in furtherance of a strike or lock-out which is illegal 


116 Labour Laws 
under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees, or with both (section 27). 
GOVERNMENT CAN PROHIBIT THE CONTINUATION OF STRIKES 
AND LOCK-OUTS 
Section 10(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 empowers the 
appropriate Government to prohibit the commencement and 
continuance of strikes and lock-outs in certain circumstances for 
investigation and adjudication of the industrial disputes in a 
peaceful atmosphere. In order to exercise the power to prohibit the 
strike or lock-out it is necessary that an industrial dispute should 
have been referred to a Board, Labour Court, Industrial Tribunal 
or National Tribunal under section 10 or the arbitrator under 
section 10A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and that on the 
date of reference for adjudication there would be a strike or lock- 
out in existence in connection with such dispute. 
An order under section 10B for prohibiting a lock-out or strike 
requires findings on facts and an adjudication thereon before the 
power under it could be exercised by the appropriate Government. 
If an order is made without determining these facts, in certain 
circumstances it may prove incapable of implementation, for 
instance, if for any valid reasons, it has become impossible to 
continue the industry, or the employer has disposed of the same, 
the order under section 10(3) will become incapable of 
implementation. The Government may not prohibit the 
continuance of a lock-out because the workmen have indulged in 
unlawful and criminal activities, and there is scope for 
apprehension that, if the work is restored, such activities would 
continue. Non-compliance with such an order is illegal under 
section 24(1)(ii) and is punishable with imprisonment and/or fine 
under section 26 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
The power to prohibit a strike or lock-out springs into existence 
only when such dispute has been made the subject of reference 
under section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. If 
Government feels that it would prohibit a strike under section 
10(3) it must give scope for the merits of all the disputes or 
demands for which the strike had been called to be gone into by 
some adjudicatory body. In regard to such dispute natural justice 
would depend upon the circumstances of the case, the nature of 
enquiry and the subject matter that was being dealt with. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 117 
LAY-OFF, RIGHT OF AN EMPLOYER AND ITS DURATION 
Chapter VA of the Industrial Disputes Act empowers the 
employer to lay-off. It determines not merely the right of the 
workmen to receive compensation but also the wider rights and 
liabilities with regard to lay-off itself. 
According to the definition given in the Act the periods of lay- 
offs are— 
(a) Lay-off for a day occurring when work is denied within 
two hours of his presenting himself for work. 
(b) Lay-off for one-half of day occurring when work is denied 
in the first half of the shift but the workman is called in 
the second half of the shift. 
LAW GOVERNING LAY-OFF 
By virtue of section 25J, these provisions have an overriding 
effect on other laws like the Industrial Employment (Standing 
Orders) Act, 1946 or other state industrial relations laws so far as 
rights and liabilities are concerned. The rights of the employees 
under the following provisions are not affected by the Chapter:— 
(a) any right which a workman has under the Minimum 
Wages Act, 1948 or any order or notification issued 
thereunder; or 
(b) any right under any operative award; or 
(c) any right under any contract with the employer; 
(d) any provisions concerning any law for the time being in 
force in any State for the settlement of industrial disputes. 
EMPLOYER’S DUTIES IN CONNECTION WITH A LAY-OFF 
The following duties are cast on the employer in connection 
with a lay-off:— 
(a) It must be a justified lay-off effected bona fide and not mala 
fide. 
(b) The employer must maintain a muster-roll of workmen. 
(c) The stoppage of work if resorted to during working hours 
must be notified by notice put up on the notice board and 
must be in accordance with the standing orders. 
(d) The period of detention of workmen if stoppage occurs 
during working hours should not exceed two hours after 
the commencement of the stoppage. 


118 Labour Laws 
(e) If the unemployment caused by lay-off is for short period 
the unemployment should be treated as compulsory leave 
either with or without wages. 
(f) If the lay-off is for an indefinite long period, the services 
may be terminated by due notice or payment of notice-pay 
in lieu of notice. 
(g) The employees must be informed of the following 
things:— 
(i) whether the employees are to remain on place of work 
or leave it; 
(ii) when work shall be resumed; 
(iii) the time when the workers are to present themselves 
for work during normal working hours. 
The period of lay-off should not be left indefinite. Where the 
workers did not suffer any loss, because of this irregularity it was 
held that the employer could not be penalised. 
Where it is not possible to specify the period of lay-off, the 
worker should be given three weeks’ time to rejoin duty when 
work is resumed. Where the workers are called back to work in 
batches the union should be consulted as otherwise it may be 
construed by the union as discrimination. Workmen laid off as a 
consequence of strike by other workmen are not entitled to lay-off 
compensation. 
QUANTUM OF LAY-OFF COMPENSATION 
The compensation must be paid at the rate and for period 
specified in section 25B of the Industrial Disputes Act. 
(1) If the lay-off occurs during working hours and results in 
the detention of the workmen not exceeding one hour the 
workmen so detailed shall not be paid for the period of 
detention. 
(2) If the period of detention in clause (1) above exceeds one 
hour, the workmen so detained shall be paid wages for 
the whole of the time during which they are detained as a 
result of stoppage. 
(3) Where the workman during the period of twelve months 
is laid-off, he shall be paid by the employer for all days 
during which he is so laid-off, except for such weekly 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 119 
holidays as may intervene, compensation at the rate of 
fifty per cent. of the total of the basic wages and dearness 
allowance that would have been payable to him had he 
not been so laid off. 
By Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1965, section 25C has 
been re-enacted as: 
“Whenever a workman (other than a badli workman or 
a casual workman), whose name is borne on the muster- 
rolls of an industrial establishment and who _ has 
completed not less than one year of continuous service 
under an employer is laid-off, whether continuously or 
intermittently, he shall be paid by the employer for all 
days during which he is so laid-off, except for such 
weekly holidays as may intervene, compensation which 
shall be equal to fifty per cent. of the total of the basic 
wages and dearness allowance that would have been 
payable to him had he not been so laid off: 
Provided that if during any period of twelve months, a 
workman is so laid off for more than forty-five days, no 
such compensation shall be payable in respect of any 
period of the lay-off after the expiry of the first forty-five 
days, if there is an agreement to that effect between the 
workman and the employer: 
Provided further that it shall be lawful for the employer 
in any case falling within the foregoing proviso to 
retrench the workman in accordance with the provisions 
contained in section 25F at any time after the expiry of the 
first forty-five days of the lay-off and when he does so, 
any compensation paid to the workman for having been 
laid-off during the preceding twelve months may be set- 
off against the compensation payable for retrenchment. 
Explanation.—“Badli workman” means a workman 
who is employed in an industrial establishment in the 
place of another workman whose name is borne on the 
muster-rolls of the establishment, but shall cease to be 
regarded as such for the purposes of this section if he has 
completed one year of continuous service in the 
establishment.” 


120 Labour Laws 
Prior practice of paying wages and dearness allowance on a 
sliding scale for the period of lay-off has also been held to be fair. 
A badli workman has been held to be entitled to lay-off 
compensation on satisfying other conditions. 
RETRENCHMENT AND COMPENSATION 
‘Retrenchment’ means discharge of surplus labour or staff in a 
continuing industry. It means the removal of ‘the dead weight of 
uneconomic surplus’. It is not necessary that removal of surplus 
must only be when the establishment runs in losses. It may 
operate at any level of profits. The legislature in using the 
expression “for any reason whatsoever” says in effect: “It does not 
matter why you are discharging the surplus if the other 
requirements of the definition are fulfilled, then it is 
retrenchment.” The words “for any reason whatsoever” in section 
2(00) of the Act exclude closure of the business. Though the reason 
may be any, but it must essentially be “retrenchment” Le., 
discharge of surplus labour or staff by the employer. The 
definition of “retrenchment” in section 2(00), though an artificial 
one, is certainly very wide and would include termination of 
services even in pursuance of a standing order. The heading of 
section 25F leaves no doubt that the observance of the provisions 
thereof is a condition precedent to retrenchment of a workman to 
whom the section applies. It would, therefore, follow that before 
action can be taken under standing orders the provisions of 
section 25F have to be complied with. The retrenchment must be 
just and fair and its justifiability can be questioned in a reference. 
Reorganisation of business rationalisation, economy, etc., are 
good grounds for retrenchment. 
CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO RETRENCHMENT 
Reading section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 it is 
clear that the requirements prescribed by it are a condition 
precedent for retrenchment of the workmen, non-compliance with 
which would render the impugned retrenchment invalid and 
inoperative. 
(a) The retrenchment must be by termination of employment; 
(b) The employee must be given one month’s notice in 
writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
retrenchment must be effected after expiry of period of 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 121 
notice or the employee should be given wages for the 
notice period in lieu of such notice [section 25F(a)]. The 
notice must specify a certain date for retrenchment, 
otherwise a mere writing would not be a notice. Notice is 
not necessary if notice pay is given. 
The employee should be paid at the time of retrenchment, 
compensation equivalent to fifteen days average pay for 
every completed year of service or any part thereof in 
excess of six months. 
EMPLOYER’S OBLIGATIONS AND DUTIES IN RETRENCHING 
EMPLOYEES 
The following further obligations lie on the employer in the 
matter of retrenchment:— 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) Maintenance of Muster-roll: The employer must maintain a 
muster-roll as required under section 25D of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
Seniority-list : Rule 77 of the Industrial Disputes (Central) 
Rules, 1957 further requires that the employer should 
prepare a list of all workmen in the particular category 
from which retrenchment is contemplated arranged 
according to seniority of their service in the category. A 
copy of this list should be affixed on a notice board at a 
conspicuous place in the premises of the industrial 
establishment at least seven days before the actual date of 
retrenchment. Rule 77 is mandatory and its violation 
renders retrenchment illegal. 
The retrenchment should be in consonance with the statutory 
provisions in section 25G: The normal rule is to retrench 
first of all the junior most employees in a particular 
category. If the employer has sufficient reasons to depart 
from this rule, only then it may be departed from and 
reasons for such departure must be recorded. 
Re-employment: The retrenched employees have a statutory 
right of re-employment if the employer proposes to take 
into employment in future any persons and _ the 
retrenched staff has a right of preference over other 
persons. Section 25F gives statutory sanction to this rule. 
Under rule 78 of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 


122 Labour Laws 
the employer has to comply with requisitions mentioned 
therein. This right is given to citizens of India only. 
TRANSFER OF AN UNDERTAKING 
Where the ownership or management of an undertaking is 
transferred, whether by agreement or by operation of law, from the 
employer in relation to that undertaking to a new employer, every 
workman who has been in continuous service for not less than 
one year in that undertaking immediately before such transfer 
shall be entitled to notice and compensation in accordance with 
the provisions of section 25F, as if the workman had been 
retrenched: 
Provided that nothing in section 25FF shall apply to a 
workman in any case where there has been a change of employers 
by reason of the transfer, if— 
(a) the service of the workman has not been interrupted by 
such transfer; 
(b ~~" the terms and conditions of service applicable to the 
workman after such transfer are not in any way less 
favourable to the workman than those applicable to him 
immediately before the transfer; and 
(c — the new employer is, under the terms of such transfer or 
otherwise, legally liable to pay to the workman, in the 
event of his retrenchment, compensation on the basis that 
his service has been continuous and has not been 
interrupted by the transfer. In such cases no 
compensation will be payable. 
CLOSURE AND COMPENSATION 
CONCEPT OF CLOSURE 
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, has defined the word 
‘closure’ recently, as permanent closing down of a place of 
employment or part thereof. The State Acts of Bombay, and M.P. 
define it as: 
“Closure” means the closing of any place or part of a place of 
employment or the total or partial suspension of work by an 
employer or the total or partial refusal by an employer to continue 
to employ persons employed by him whether such closing, 
suspension or refusal is or is not in consequence of an industrial 
dispute. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 123 
The essence of closure whether whole or partial is closing 
down of the place of employment. 
CLOSURE—A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT 
It is a fundamental right of a citizen to carry on or close down 
business, industry or work if he so chooses and nobody can be 
compelled to carry on against his will. Closure must be, when 
effected, permanent. This does not mean that the employer is 
barred from re-starting the closed business or because the 
business is restarted, it was not closed with the intention of 
closing permanently. It would be a question of fact whether the 
closure, when effected, was intended to be a permanent or 
temporary closure. Refusal to employ a single worker may be a 
closure. The right is subject to liability of payment of 
compensation to the workmen as provided by section 25 FFF of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and also to obtain prior permission 
in cases covered by Chapter VB of the Act. 
CLOSURE OF PART OF UNDERTAKING 
A closure of a section or department or a branch or a part of 
undertaking is a “closure” and is valid. It is not retrenchment. 
Closure may also be effected in stages. 
UNFAIR LABOUR PRACTICES 
Effective from 21-8-1984, unfair labour practices have been 
introduced under the Industrial Disputes Act. 
An “unfair labour practice” has been defined as any of the 
practices specified in Fifth Schedule. 
Sections 25T and 25U of the Act provide as under— 
(1) Prohibition of unfair labour practice: No employer or 
workman or a trade union, whether registered under the 
Trade Unions Act, 1926 (16 of 1926) or not, shall commit 
any unfair labour practice. 
(2) Penalty for committing unfair labour practices: Any person 
who commits any unfair labour practice shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months or with fine which may extend to 
one thousand rupees or with both. 
For exemuration of such practices refer to Fifth Schedule of the 
Act. 


124 Labour Laws 
COMPENSATION TO WORKMEN IN CASE OF CLOSING DOWN OF 
UNDERTAKINGS 
1. Where an undertaking is closed down for any reason 
whatsoever, every workman who has been in continuous service 
for not less than one year in that undertaking immediately before 
such closure shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of 
section 25FFF be entitled to notice and compensation in 
accordance with the provisions of section 25F, as if the workman 
had been retrenched: 
Provided that where the undertaking is closed down on 
account of unavoidable circumstances beyond the control of the 
employer, the compensation to be paid to the workman under 
clause (b) of section 25F shall not exceed his average pay for three 
months. 
Explanation.—An undertaking which is closed down by reason 
merely of— 
(i) financial difficulties (including financial losses); or 
(ii 
(iii) the expiry of the period of lease or licence granted to it; or — accumulation of undisposed of stock; or 
(iv) in a case where the undertaking is engaged in mining 
operation, exhaustion of the minerals in the area in which 
such operations are carried on, 
shall not be deemed to be closed down on account of unavoidable 
circumstances beyond the control of the employer within the 
meaning of the proviso to this sub-section. 
1A. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of 
section 25FFF where an undertaking engaged in mining 
operations is closed down by reason merely of ex-workman 
referred to in that sub-section shall be entitled to any notice or 
compensation in accordance with the provisions of section 25F, 
if— 
(a) the employer provides the workman with alternative 
employment with effect from the date of closure at the 
same remuneration as he was entitled to receive and on 
the same terms and conditions of service as were 
applicable to him, immediately before the closure; 
(b) the service of the workman has not been interrupted by 
such alternative employment; and 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 125 
(c) the employer is, under the terms of such alternative 
employment or otherwise legally liable to pay to the 
workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation 
on the basis that his service has been continuous and has 
not been interrupted by such alternative employment. 
1B. For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (1A) of section 
25FFF, the expressions “minerals” and “mining operations” shall 
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses (a) 
and (d) of section 3 of the Mines and Minerals (Regulations and 
Development) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957). 
2. Where any undertaking set up for the construction of 
buildings, bridges, roads, canals, dams or other construction work 
is closed down on account of the completion of the work within 
two years from the date on which the undertaking had been set 
up, no workman employed therein shall be entitled to any 
compensation under clause (b) of section 25F, but if the 
construction work is not so completed within two years, he shall 
be entitled to notice and compensation under that section for every 
completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess 
of six months. 
SIXTY DAYS’ NOTICE TO BE GIVEN OF INTENTION TO CLOSE 
DOWN CERTAIN UNDERTAKING 
1. An employer who intends to close down an undertaking 
shall serve, at least sixty days before the date on which the 
intended closure is to become effective, a notice, in the prescribed 
manner, on the appropriate Government stating clearly the 
reasons for the intended closure of the undertaking: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to— 
(a) an undertaking in which— 
(i) less than fifty workmen are employed, or 
(ii) less than fifty workmen were employed on an average 
per working day in the preceding twelve months; 
(b) an undertaking set up for the construction of buildings, 
bridges, roads, canals, dams or for other construction 
work or project. 
2. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
appropriate Government may, if it is satisfied that owing to such 
exceptional circumstances as accident in the undertaking or death 


126 Labour Laws 
of the employer or the like it is necessary so to do, by order, direct 
that provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply in relation to 
such undertaking for such period as may be specified in the order 
(section 25FFA). 
CONTROLS ON RETRENCHMENT, CLOSURE AND LAY-OFF 
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, prior to enactment of 
Chapter VB did not contain any provisions for preventing lay-off 
and retrenchment. The employers had an unfettered right to close 
down an establishment, subject to the provisions of 60 days’ 
notice and often it was utilised to stifle trade union activities. 
There had been many cases of large-scale lay-offs, particularly 
by large companies and undertakings. This action on the part of 
the management had resulted in an all-round demoralising effect 
on the workmen. In order to prevent avoidable hardship to the 
employees and to maintain higher tempo of production and 
productivity, it became necessary to put some _ reasonable 
restrictions on the employer’s right to lay-off, retrenchment, and 
closure. 
By the Amendment Act of 1976 prior approval of the approriate 
Government is necessary in the case of lay-off, retrenchment and 
closure in any industrial establishment where 300 or more 
workmen are employed. In the interests. of rehabiliation of 
workmen and for maintenance of supplies and services essential 
to the life of the community, a provision is also made in the Act for 
restarting the undertakings which were already closed down 
otherwise than on account of unavoidable circumstances beyond 
the control of the employer. 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER VB RELATING TO LAY-OFF, 
RETRENCHMENT AND CLOSURE OF CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS 
(i) Application to undertakings employing 100 or more workmen: 
(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to an 
industrial establishment (not being an establishment 
of a seasonal character or in which work is performed 
only intermittently) in which not less than one 
hundred workmen were employed on an average per 
working day for the preceding twelve months [section 
25K (1)]. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 127 
(2) If a question arises whether an_ industrial 
establishment is of a seasonal character or whether 
work is performed therein only intermittently, the 
decision of the appropriate Government thereon shall 
be final [section 25K(2)]. 
(ii) Definitions: For the purposes of this Chapter— 
(a) “industrial establishment” means— 
(i) a factory as defined in clause (m) of section 2 of 
the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948); 
(ii) a mine as defined in clause (j) of sub-section (1) of 
section 2 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952); or 
(iii) a plantation as defined in clause (f) of section 2 of 
the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951); 
(b) notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause 
(ii) of clause (a) of section 2 — 
(i) in relation to any company in which not less than 
fifty-one per cent, of the paid-up share capital is 
held by the Central Government; or 
(ii) in relation to any corporation (not being a 
corporation referred to in sub-clause (i) of clause 
(a) of section 2) established by or under any law 
made by Parliament, 
the Central Government shall be the appropriate Government 
(section 25L). 
(iii) Prior permission necessary for lay-off: 
(1) No workman (other than a badli workman or a casual 
(2) workman) whose name is borne on the muster-rolls of 
an industrial establishment to which this Chapter 
applies shall be laid-off by his employer except with 
the previous permission of such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette unless such lay-off 
is due to shortage of power or to natural calamity, 
and in case of a mine such lay-off is due also to fire, 
flood, excess of inflammable gas or explosion. 
Where the workmen (other than badli workmen or 
casual workmen) of an industrial establishment 
referred to in sub-section (1) have been laid-off before 


128 Labour Laws 
the commencement of the Industrial Disputes 
(Amendment) Act, 1976 and such lay-off continues at 
such commencement, the employer in relation to such 
establishment shall, within a period of fifteen days 
from such commencement, apply to the authority 
specified under sub-section (1) for permission to 
continue the lay-off (section 25M). 
Where the workmen (other than badli workmen or 
casual workmen) of an industrial establishment being 
a mine have been laid-off under sub-section (1) for 
reasons of fire, flood or excess of inflammable gas or 
explosion, the employer in relation to such 
establishment shall, within a period of thirty days 
from the date of commencement of such lay-off apply 
to the authority specified under sub-section (1) for 
permission to continue the lay-off. 
(iv) Procedure for seeking permission: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) In the case of every application for permission under 
sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the authority to 
whom the application has been made may, after 
making such inquiry as he thinks fit, grant or refuse, 
for reasons to be recorded in writing, the permission 
applied for. 
Where an application for permission has been made 
under sub- section (1) or sub-section (2) or (2A) and 
the authority to whom the application is made does 
not communicate the permission or the refusal to 
grant the permission to the employer within a period 
of two months from the date on which the application 
is made, the permission applied for shall be deemed 
to have been granted on the expiration of the said 
period of two months. 
Where no application for permission under sub- 
section (1) is made, or where no application for 
permission under sub-section (2) or (2A) has been 
made within the period specified therein, or where 
the permission for the lay-off or the continuance of the 
lay-off has been refused, such lay-off shall be deemed 
to be illegal from the date on which the workmen 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 129 
have been laid-off and the workmen shall be entitled 
to all the benefits under any law for the time being in 
force as if they had not been laid-off. 
(4) The provisions of section 25C (other than the second 
proviso thereto) shall apply to cases of lay-off referred 
to in this section. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a workman shall 
not be deemed to be laid-off by an employer if such employer offers 
any alternative employment (which in the opinion of the employer 
does not call for any special skill or previous experience and can 
be done by the workman) in the same establishment from which 
he has been laid-off or in any other establishment belonging to the 
same employer, situate in the same town or village, or situate 
within such distance from the establishment to which he belongs 
that the transfer will not involve any hardship to the workman 
having regard to the facts and circumstances of his case, provided 
that the wages which would normally have been paid to the 
workman are offered for the alternative appointment also [section 
25M(3) to (6)]. 
(v) Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen: 
(1) No workman employed in any _ industrial 
establishment to which this Chapter applies, who has 
been in continuous service for not less than one year 
under an employer shall be retrenched by that 
employer until— 
(a) the workman has been given three months’ notice 
in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired 
or the workman has been paid in lieu of such 
notice, wages for the period of the notice: 
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if 
the retrenchment is under an agreement, which 
specifies a date for termination of service; 
(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of 
retrenchment, compensation which shall be 
equivalent to fifteen days’ average pay for every 
completed year of continuous service or any part 
thereof in excess of six months; and 


130 
(2) 
(3) Labour Laws 
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the 
appropriate Government or such authority as 
may be specified by the appropriate Government 
by notification in the Official Gazette, and the 
permission of such Government or authority is 
obtained under sub-section (2). 
On receipt of a notice under clause (c) of sub-section 
(1) the appropriate Government or authority may after 
making such inquiry as such Government or 
authority thinks fit, grant or refuse, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing the permission for the 
retrenchment to which the notice relates. 
Where the Government or authority does not 
communicate the permission or the refusal to grant 
the permission to the employer within three months 
of the date of service of the notice under clause (c) of 
sub-section (1) the Government or authority shall be 
deemed to have granted permission for such 
retrenchment on the expiration of the said period of 
three months [section 25N(1) to (3)]. 
(vi) Application for permission: 
(1) 
(2) Where at the commencement of the Industrial 
Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1976, the period of notice 
given under clause (a) of section 25F for the 
retrenchment of any workman has not expired, the 
employer shall not retrench the workman but shall, 
within a period of fifteen days from such 
commencement, apply to the appropriate Government 
or to the authority specified in sub-section(2) for 
permission for retrenchment. 
Where an application for permission has been made 
under sub-section (4) and the appropriate 
Government or the authority, as the case may be, does 
not communicate the permission or the refusal to 
grant the permission to the employer within a period 
of two months from the date on which the application 
is made, the permission applied for shall be deemed 
to have been granted on the expiration of the said 
period of two months. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 131 
(3) Where no application for permission under clause (c) 
of sub-section (1) is made, or where no application for 
permission under sub-section (4) is made within the 
period specified therein or where the permission for 
the retrenchment has been refused, such retrenchment 
shall be deemed to be illegal from the date on which 
the notice of retrenchment was given to the workman 
and the workman shall be entitled to all the benefits 
under any law for the time being in force as if no 
notice has been given to him. 
(4) Where at the commencement of the Industrial 
Disputes (Amendment) Act, 1976, a dispute relating, 
either solely or in addition to other matters, to the 
retrenchment of any workman or workmen of an 
industrial establishment to which this Chapter 
applies is pending before a Conciliation Officer or the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the 
case may be, and— 
(a) there is an allegation that such retrenchment is by 
way of victimisation; or 
(b) the appropriate Government is of the opinion that 
retrenchment is not in the interests of the 
maintenance of industrial peace, 
the appropriate Government, if satisfied that it is 
necessary so to do, may, by order withdraw such 
dispute or, as the case may be, such dispute in so far 
as it relates to such retrenchment transfer the same to 
an authority (being an authority specified by the 
appropriate Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette) for consideration whether such 
retrenchment is justified and any order passed by 
such authority shall be final and binding on the 
employer and the workman or workmen [section 
25N(4) to (7)]. 
APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO GOVERNMENT 
(1) Where an application for permission has been made under 
sub-section (1), the appropriate Government, after making such 
enquiry as it thinks fit and after giving a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard to the employer, the workmen and the persons 


132 Labour Laws 
interested in such closure may, having regard to the genuineness 
and adequacy of the reasons stated by the employer, the interests 
of the general public and all other relevant factors by order and for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, grant or refuse to grant such 
permission and a copy of such order shall be communicated to the 
employer and the workmen [section 25-O(2)]. 
(2) Where an application has been made under sub-section (1) 
and the appropriate Government does not communicate the order 
granting or refusing to grant permission to the employer within a 
period of sixty days from the date on which such application is 
made, the permission applied for shall be deemed to have been 
granted on the expiration of the said period of sixty days. 
(3) An order of the appropriate Government granting or 
refusing to grant permission shall, subject to the provisions of sub- 
section(5), be final and binding on all the parties and shall remain 
in force for one year from the date of such order. 
MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS 
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE, ETC., TO REMAIN UNCHANGED UNDER 
CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES DURING PENDENCY OF PROCEEDINGS 
(1) During the pendency of any conciliation proceeding before a 
Conciliation Officer or a Board or of any proceeding before a 
Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal in respect of an 
industrial dispute, no employer shall— 
(a) in regard to any matter connected with the dispute, alter, 
to the prejudice of the workmen concerned in such 
dispute, the conditions of service applicable to them 
immediately before the commencement of such 
proceedings; or 
(b) for any misconduct connected with the dispute, discharge 
or punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise, any 
workman concerned in such dispute, 
save with the express permission in writing of the authority before 
which the proceeding is pending. 
(2) During the pendency of any such proceeding in respect of 
an industrial dispute, the employer may, in accordance with the 
standing orders applicable to a workman concerned in such 
dispute or where there are no such standing orders, in accordance 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 133 
with the terms of a contract whether express or implied between 
him and the workman— 
(a) alter, in regard to any matter not connected with the 
dispute, the conditions of service applicable to that 
workman immediately before the commencement of such 
proceeding, or 
(b) for any misconduct not connected with the dispute, 
discharge or punish, whether by dismissal or otherwise, 
the workman: 
Provided that no such workman shall be discharged or 
dismissed, unless he has been paid wages for one month and an 
application has been made by the employer to the authority before 
which the proceeding is pending for approval of the action taken 
by the employer. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), no 
employer shall, during the pendency of any such proceeding in 
respect of an industrial dispute, take any action against any 
protected workman concerned in such dispute — 
(a) by altering, to the prejudice of such protected workman, 
the conditions of service applicable to him immediately 
before the commencement of such proceeding; or 
(b) by discharging or punishing, whether by dismissal or 
otherwise, such protected workman, 
save with the express permission in writing of the authority before 
which the proceeding is pending. 
For the purposes of this sub-section, a “protected workman”, in 
relation to an establishment, means a workman who, being an 
officer of a registered trade union connected with the 
establishment, is recognised as such in accordance with rules 
made in this behalf. 
(4) In every establishment, the number of workmen to be 
recognised as protected workmen for the purposes of sub-section 
(3) shall be one per cent of the total number of workmen employed 
therein subject to minimum number of five protected workmen 
and a maximum number of one hundred protected workmen and 
for the aforesaid purpose the appropriate Government may make 
rules providing for the distribution of such protected workmen 
among various trade unions, if any, connected with the 


134 Labour Laws 
establishment and the manner in which the workmen may be 
chosen and recognised as protected workmen. 
(5) Where an employer makes an application to a Conciliation 
Officer, Board, an arbitrator, a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal under the proviso to sub-section (2) for approval of the 
action taken by him, the authority concerned shall, without delay, 
hear such application and pass, within a period of three months 
from the date of receipt of such application such order in relation 
thereto as it deems fit: 
Provided that where any such authority considers it necessary 
or expedient so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
extend such period by such further period as it may think fit: 
Provided further that no proceedings before any such authority 
shall lapse merely on the ground that any period specified in this 
sub-section had expired without such proceedings being 
completed. 
MAINTENANCE OF PEACE DURING PENDENCY OF PROCEEDINGS 
The object of section 33 is to protect the workmen concerned in 
disputes which form the subject matter of pending proceedings 
against victimisation by the employer on account of their having 
raised industrial disputes or their continuing the pending 
proceedings. The further object of the section is to ensure that 
proceedings in connection with industrial disputes already 
pending should be brought to a termination in a peaceful 
atmosphere and that no employer should, during the pendency of 
those proceedings, take any action of the kind mentioned in the 
section which may give rise to fresh disputes likely to further 
exacerbate the already strained relations between the employer 
and the workmen. 
PROCEDURE FOR CHANGING CONDITIONS 
Under the section 33(1) if an employer wants to change the 
conditions of service in regard to a matter connected with a 
pending dispute, or to take any action against an employee on the 
ground of an alleged misconduct connected with the pending 
dispute he cannot do so unless he obtains previous permission in 
writing of the appropriate authority. 
Section 33(2) deals with the alterations in the conditions of 
service as well as discharge or dismissal of workmen concerned in 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 135 
any pending dispute where such alteration or such discharge or 
dismissal is in regard to a matter not connected with the pending 
dispute. 
When an employer, however, wants to dismiss or discharge a 
workman for alleged misconduct not connected with the dispute 
he can do so in accordance with the standing orders but a ban is 
imposed on the exercise of his power by the proviso. The proviso 
requires that no such workman shall be discharged or dismissed 
unless two conditions are satisfied, the first is that the employee 
concerned should be paid wages for one month, and the second is 
that an application should have been made by the employer to the 
appropriate authority for approval of the action taken by 
employer. 
WORKMEN CONCERNED IN THE DISPUTE 
(i) That expression includes all workmen on whose behalf the 
dispute has been raised as well as those who would be bound by 
the award which may be made in the said dispute. It is wider than 
the phrase ‘party to the suit’. All workmen irrespective of 
membership of union are workmen concerned. Any other 
workman in the establishment who would be bound by the award 
under section 18 of the Act and who is also a member of the union 
espousing the cause is a workman concerned in the dispute. 
Workmen subsequently employed are workmen concerned. 
(ii) Workmen held not concerned: Workmen employed in certain 
quarries would not be “workmen concerned” in a dispute 
between the workers in a cement factory and the management of 
that factory, though the proprietor may be the same. The workmen 
who were not members of the union and to whom no general 
notice requiring their appearance was issued, were not considered 
to be “workmen concerned in the dispute” within the meaning of 
section 33 of the Act. 
APPLICATION WITHOUT PREJUDICE TENABLE 
Where the employer has preliminary objection that section 33 
does not apply he can make an application without prejudice to 
his objection. 
APPLICATION WHEN NOT NECESSARY 
Where services have been suspended pending inquiry or 
terminated as a contractual measure or on account of real closure, 
or retrenchment, no application under this provision is necessary. 


136 Labour Laws 
SCOPE OF INQUIRY WHEN PERMISSION APPLICATION IS MADE TO 
THE TRIBUNAL 
Where an application is made by the employer for the requisite 
permission under section 33, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in 
dealing with such an application is limited to consider whether a 
prima facie case has been made out by the employer for the 
dismissal of the employee in question, and either grant the 
permission or refuse it accordingly as it holds whether a prima 
facie case is or is not made out by the employer. 
A prima facie case does not mean a case proved up to the hilt but 
a case which can be said to be established if the evidence which is 
led in support of the same were believed. While determining 
whether a prima facie case had been made out, the relevant 
consideration is whether on the evidence led it was possible to 
arrive at the conclusion in question and not whether that was the 
only conclusion which could be arrived at on that evidence. 
Judgment of a criminal court must be considered to be relevant 
and admissible. It certainly could furnish good material to the 
Industrial Tribunal to form a prima facie opinion about the merits 
of the case before it. The acquittal of an accused in a criminal case 
could not stand in the way of the Industrial Tribunal granting the 
permission if it finds that the employer has made out a prima facie 
case on the evidence on record for the permission asked for. 
In these proceedings it is not open to the Tribunal to consider 
whether the action taken by the employer is proper or adequate or 
whether it errs on the side of excessive severity; nor can the 
Tribunal grant permission, subject to certain conditions, which it 
may deem to be fair. 
The Industrial Tribunal has no power to substitute another 
punishment for the one which was sought to be meted out by the 
employer to the employee nor to impose any condition on the 
employer before the requisite permission could be granted. 
PERMISSION DOES NOT BAR RAISING OF INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE 
REGARDING ACTION 
The nature and scope of proceedings under section 33 shows 
that removing or refusing to remove the ban on punishment or 
dismissal of workmen does not bar the raising of an industrial 
dispute when as a result of the permission granted by the 
Tribunal the employer dismisses or punishes the workmen. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 137 
EFFECT OF PERMISSION 
If the permission is granted, the ban would be lifted and the 
employer would be at liberty, if he so chooses thereafter, to deal 
with the punishment to the workmen. The permission granted 
under section 33 does not have the effect of validating the order of 
dismissal. 
REFUSAL OF PERMISSION 
The settled position in law is that permission should be refused 
if the Tribunal is satisfied that the management's action is not 
bona fide or that the principles of natural justice have been violated 
or that the materials on the basis of which the management came 
to a certain conclusion could not justify any reasonable person in 
coming to such a conclusion. 
EFFECT OF REFUSAL 
The workman continues in employment and claim for wages 
will be maintainable. 
PROTECTED WORKMAN 
He cannot be proceeded against without obtaining permission 
for dismissal, discharge or punishment from the Tribunal. The 
law relating to protected workman is contained in section 33(3) of 
the Industrial Disputes Act read with rule 61 of the Industrial 
Disputes (Central) Rules. 
For the purpose of this sub-section a ‘protected workman’, in 
relation to an establishment, means a workman who, being an 
officer of a registered trade union connected with the 
establishment, is recognised as such in accordance with rules 
made in this behalf. 
In every establishment, the number of workmen to be 
recognised as protected workmen for the purposes of sub-section 
(3) shall be one per cent of the total number of workmen employed 
therein subject to a minimum number of five protected workmen 
and a maximum number of one hundred protected workmen and 
for the aforesaid purpose, the appropriate Government may make 
rules providing for the distribution of such protected workmen 
among various trade unions, if any, connected with the 
establishment and the manner in which the workmen may be 
chosen and recognised as protected workmen. 
No permission is necessary after the main reference is decided. 


138 Labour Laws 
PRIOR APPROVAL OF ACTION NOT CONTEMPLATED 
An application for approval of the action taken, presupposes 
that there is the order of actual discharge or dismissal made by the 
employer and it is for the approval of this order that’ the 
application is made. This is borne out from Form ‘K’ under rule 60 
of the Rules framed under the Act which corresponds to Form XV 
under rule 31 of the U.P. Rules. 
Sub-section (2)(b) read together with the proviso contemplates 
that the employer may pass an order of dismissal or discharge 
before obtaining the approval of the authority concerned and at 
the same time make an application of the action taken by him. 
It is now settled law that if the application for approval is 
rejected by the appropriate authority including the adjudicator, 
the concerned workman will be automatically reinstated. 
PROVISIONS DO NOT APPLY TO DISCHARGE SIMPLICITER 
A discharge which is by way of punishment would fall under 
the second category, viz., that of punishment, and a discharge 
which is otherwise than by way of punishment would fall under 
the first category, viz., discharge simpliciter. Discharge of 
workman simpliciter whether it is justified or not would not 
amount to alteration of the conditions of service of the concerned 
workman within the meaning of section 33(2)(a) of the Act and 
would not therefore attract it. Similarly the provisions do not 
apply to retrenchment. 
ACTION MUST BE TAKEN IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE STANDING 
ORDERS 
The limitation is imposed by this section that the standing 
orders will have to be complied with. It cannot however be 
contended that section 33(2) has no application to a case where 
there are no standing orders. The existence of standing orders is a 
prerequisite of the exercise of the powers by the management, and 
the absence of standing orders will not place it in a better position 
so as to claim exemption from the operation of the said provision. 
Model Standing Orders will also apply. 
If, therefore, standing orders are applied by him to his workers 
he cannot escape the operation of sub-section (2) on the ground 
that the standing orders are not certified. He is required to apply 
for approval of the action taken by him. Standing Orders 
regarding considerations for imposing punishment must also be 
complied with. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 139 
PAYING OF ONE MONTH’S WAGES IS A MANDATORY CONDITION: 
AN OFFER OF PAYMENT IS SUFFICIENT COMPLIANCE WITH THE 
PROVISIONS 
Though section 33 speaks of payment of one month’s wages, it 
can only mean that the employer has tendered’ the wages and that 
would amount to payment, for otherwise a workman could 
always make the section unworkable by refusing to take the 
wages. 
STAGE OF APPLICATION 
The Calcutta High Court had held that payment of wages and 
the making of the application should be simultaneous with the 
order of discharge or dismissal. The Bombay and Gujarat High 
Courts have taken contrary views in the matter. 
The Supreme Court in a recent case has observed: “Though an 
express permission in writing is not required in case falling under 
the proviso to section 33(2)(b) it is desirable that there should not 
be any time-lag between the action taken by the employer and the 
order passed by the appropriate authority in an enquiry under the 
said proviso.” 
MANNER OF FULFILLING THE CONDITIONS SIMULTANEOUSLY 
It is pointed out that the word “simultaneously” must of course 
be taken reasonably and a notion of split-second timing should 
not be imported. It should be “done at once and without delay”, 
and it will depend upon the fact of each case whether the 
application had been made at once without delay. A delay of one 
month without any reason whatsoever would be inexcusable, but, 
where the employer was going through a period of very great 
stress and strain, the undertaking was in a state of collapse there 
might exist very cogent reason for delay. The offer made the next 
day is sufficient compliance. 
PROCEEDINGS ARE INDEPENDENT OF REFERENCE 
The proceedings under this section are totally independent 
proceedings. They will not die with the death of the reference or its 
culmination into an award. 
The argument that the proceedings if continued beyond the 
date of the final decision of the main industrial dispute would 
become futile and meaningless cannot be accepted. The Tribunal 
does not become functus officio. 


140 Labour Laws 
SUPERANNUATION DOES NOT ATTRACT SECTION 33(2) 
Such retirement on superannuation would not amount to 
‘discharge’ within the meaning of section 33(2)(b) of the Act. 
Further no approval in such a case would be required under the 
proviso to section 33(2)(b) of the Act. 
WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION 
Where the Industrial Tribunal permitted the concerned 
workmen to withdraw their complaints under section 33A of the 
Industrial Disputes Act without prejudice to their objections to the 
application for approval, they were not barred from objecting to 
the grant of approval on the ground that order on section 33A 
applications got the force of an award. 
SCOPE OF INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 33(2) IN APPROVAL 
PROCEEDINGS 
The jurisdiction of the appropriate industrial authority in 
holding an inquiry under section 33(2)(b) is not wider and is more 
limited than that permitted under section 33(1), and in exercising 
its powers under section 33(2) of the Act, the appropriate 
authority must bear in mind the departure deliberately made in 
separating the two classes of causes falling under the two sub- 
sections, and in providing for express permission in one case and 
approval in the other. No interference in punishment can be done. 
The employer cannot effect a dismissal by merely suitably 
amending the original order. The management should ask for 
opportunity to adduce evidence. If the Tribunal does not approve 
of the action taken by the employer, the result would be that action 
taken by him would fall and thereupon the workman would be 
deemed never to have been dismissed or discharged and would 
remain in the service of the employer. In such a case no specific 
provision as to reinstatement is necessary. 
COMPLAINTS REGARDING CONTRAVENTION OF SECTION 33 
Section 33A provides a summary remedy for adjudication of 
disputes arising out of contravention of statutory safeguards and 
protection given under section 33 of the Act to employees during 
the pendency of conciliation or adjudication proceedings. 
By section 33A an employee aggrieved by a wrongful order of 
dismissal passed against him in contravention of section 33 is 
given a right to move the Tribunal in redress of his grievance 
without having to take recourse to section 10 of the Act. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 141 
WHO CAN MAKE COMPLAINT ? 
An aggrieved workman against whom action is taken can make 
a complaint under section 33 of the Act. A complaint filed by a 
union or its Secretary duly authorised by the aggrieved workman 
must be held to have been properly presented. In the absence of 
any proof to show that the office bearer of the union was 
authorised to prefer the complaint, it cannot be considered to be a 
valid complaint. No complaint can be preferred if no industrial 
dispute exists. It is not necessary, that when the complaint is 
made, the main dispute should be pending. 
INQUIRY IS CO-EXTENSIVE WITH INQUIRY UNDER SECTION 10 OF 
THE ACT 
The scheme of the section clearly indicates that the authority to 
whom the complaint is made is to decide both the issues, viz. 
(i) the effect of contravention, and (ii) the merits of the act or order 
of the employer. 
Since the scope of section 33A is co-extensive, the employee 
would not succeed in obtaining an order of reinstatement merely 
by proving contravention of section 33 by the employer. After such 
contravention is proved it would still be open to the employer to 
justify the impugned dismissal on the merits. The Tribunal has 
power to order reinstatement in such proceedings. 
TRIBUNAL HAS POWER TO GRANT INTERIM RELIEF 
In the dispute between the management of Hotel Imperial and 
their workmen, the Supreme Court held that in view of the 
language of section 10(4) of the Act interim relief, where it is 
admissible, can be granted as a matter incidental to the main 
question referred to the Tribunal without being itself referred to in 
express terms. 
SPECIAL PROVISION FOR ADJUDICATION AS TO WHETHER 
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE, ETC., CHANGED DURING PENDENCY OF 
PROCEEDINGS 
Where an employer contravenes the provisions of section 33 
during the pendency of proceedings before a Conciliation Officer, 
Board, an arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, 
any employee aggrieved by such contravention, may make a 
complaint in writing, in the prescribed manner— 


142 Labour Laws 
(a) to such Conciliation Officer or Board, and the 
Conciliation Officer or Board shall take such complaint 
into account in mediating in, and promoting the 
settlement of, such industrial dispute; and 
(b) to such arbitrator, Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal and on receipt of such complaint, the arbitrator, 
Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case 
may be, shall adjudicate upon the complaint as if it were a 
dispute referred to or pending before it, in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and shall submit his or its 
award to the appropriate Government and the provisions 
of this Act shall apply accordingly. 
POWER TO TRANSFER CERTAIN PROCEEDINGS 
(1) The appropriate Government may by order in writing and 
for reasons to be stated therein, withdraw any proceeding under 
this Act pending before a Labour Court, Tribunal or National 
Tribunal and transfer the same to another Labour Court, Tribunal 
or National Tribunal, as the case may be, for the disposal of the 
proceeding and the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal 
to which the proceeding is so transferred may, subject to special 
directions in the order of transfer, proceed either de novo or from 
the stage at which it was so transferred: 
Provided that where a proceeding under section 33 or section 
33A is pending before a Tribunal or National Tribunal, the 
proceeding may also be transferred to a Labour Court. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), any 
Tribunal or National Tribunal, if so authorised by the appropriate 
Government, may transfer any proceeding under section 33 or 
section 33A pending before it to any one of the Labour Courts 
specified for the disposal of such proceeding by the appropriate 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette and the Labour 
Court to which the proceeding is so transferred shall dispose of 
the same. A general order of transfer or proceedings is valid. It 
must be a speaking order through Government. 
The language of section 33B does not suggest that the transfer 
permitted by the said provision is only from a Labour Court to 
Labour Court, from a Tribunal to another Tribunal and from a 
National Tribunal to another National Tribunal. The section 
provides that the Government can withdraw a proceeding under 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 143 
this provision pending before a Labour Court or Tribunal or 
National Tribunal, as the case may be. The expression “as the case 
may be” clearly indicates as the facts of the particular case 
demand. Therefore, if in a given case, the State Government is 
informed that a reference which is already made by it to a Labour 
Court, is likely to involve more than 100 workmen and, therefore, 
ultimately does not result in the settlement of the dispute referred 
to for adjudication in.order to achieve the purpose and object of 
the Act which is investigation and settlement of industrial 
disputes, the Government is given the power to transfer the 
reference to an Industrial Tribunal, recording the reasons for 
doing so, for, in such a case transfer from one Labour Court to 
another Labour Court would be purposeless and futile. The words 
“as the case may be” cannot be understood to be permitted only 
from a Labour Court to another Labour Court or from a Tribunal to 
another Tribunal and from a National Tribunal to another 
National Tribunal, the Legislature would have used _ that 
expression but the Legislature has designedly used the words “as 
the case may be” in order to make the provision flexible and give 
the power to the Government to transfer from one forum to 
another, as the circumstances and facts of the case demand. 
RECOVERY OF MONEY DUE FROM AN EMPLOYER 
(1) Where any money is due to a workman from an employer 
under a settlement or an award or under the provisions of Chapter 
VA, the workman himself or any other person authorised by him 
in writing in this behalf, or, in the case of the death of the 
workman, his assignee or heirs may, without prejudice to any 
other mode of recovery, make an application to the appropriate 
Government for the recovery of money due to him, and if the 
appropriate Government is satisfied that any money is so due, it 
shall issue a certificate for that amount to the Collector who shall 
proceed to recover the same in the same manner as an arrear of 
land revenue: 
Provided that every such application shall be made within one 
year from the date on which the money became due to the 
workman from the employer: 
Provided further that any such application may be entertained 
after the expiry of the said period of one year, if the appropriate 
Government is satisfied that the applicant had sufficient case for 


144 Labour Laws 
not making the application within a period, not exceeding three 
months: 
Provided that where the Presiding Officer of a Labour Court 
considers it necessary or expedient so to do, he may, for reasons to 
be recorded in writing, extend such period by such further period 
as he may think fit [section 33C(2)]. 
(2) Where any workman is entitled to receive from the employer 
any money or any benefit which is capable of being computed in 
terms of money and if any question arises as to the amount of 
money due or as to the amount at which such benefit should be 
computed, then the question may, subject to any rules that may be 
made under this Act, be decided by such Labour Court as may be 
specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government. 
(3) For the purposes of computing the money value of a benefit, 
the Labour Court may, if it so thinks fit, appoint a Commissioner 
who shall, after taking such evidence as may be necessary, submit 
a report to the Labour Court and the Labour Court shall determine 
the amount after considering the report of the Commissioner and 
other circumstances of the case. 
(4) The decision of the Labour Court shall be forwarded by it to 
the appropriate Government and any amount found due by the 
Labour Court may be recovered in the manner provided for in sub- 
section (1). 
(5) Where workmen employed under the same employer are 
entitled to receive from him any money or any benefit capable of 
being computed in terms of money, then, subject to such rules as 
may be made in this behalf, a single application for the recovery of 
the amount due may be made on behalf of or in respect of any 
number of such workmen. 


The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 145 
PENALTIES 
The Penalties can be summarised as follows:— 
PENALTY 
Imprison- Fine 
ment upto 
: 
25R(1) Rs. 5,000 
25R(2) | Contravening an order Rs. 2,000 
refusing to grant permission per day 
25U Committing unfair labour Six months Rs. 1,000 
practices as specified. 
26 (a) Illegal strikes one month Rs. 50 
(b) Illegal lock-outs one month Rs. 1,000 
79 § Instigation for strikes 6 months Rs. 1,000 
or lock-outs 
28. Giving financial aid for 6 months Rs. 1,000 
illegal strikes or lock-outs 
29 Breach of settlement or 6 months Rs. 2,500 
award per day 
30 Disclosing confidential 6 months Rs. 1,000 
information 
— Section} Action/Omission 
Laying-off, Retrenching 
workers without prior 
permission of appropriate 
authorities in an industrial 
establishment in which not 
less than 100 workers were 
employed on an average 
per working day for the 
preceding 12 months 
Closure of an industrial 
establishment (supra) 
without permission 
Closure without notice Rs. 500 
under section 25FFA 
Other offences Rs. 1,000 
Contravention of Rs. 100 
any provision of 
the Act or Rules 31(2) 




Applicability of the 
Act 
* Every industrial 
establishment 
wherein 100 or 
more (in many 
States it is 50 or 
more). 
« Any industry 
covered by Bombay 
Industrial Relations 
Act, 1946. 
¢ Industrial 
establishment 
covered by M.P. 
Industrial 
Employment 
(Standing Orders) 
Act, 1961. Sec. 1 
Conditions for 
Certification of 
Standing Orders 
¢ Every matter to be 
set out as per 
Schedule and Rule 
2A. 
* The standing orders 
to be in conformity 
with the provisions of 
the Act. 
Submissions of Draft 
Standing Orders 
Within six months from 
the date when the Act 
becomes applicable to 
an industrial 
establishment. Five 
copies of the draft 
Standing Orders are to 
be submitted to the 
Certifying Officer under 
the Act. 
Sec. 3 
PENALTIES 
offence + Failure of employer to submit draft Standing Orders fine of Rs.5000 and Rs.200 for every day on continuation of 
* Fine of Rs.100 on contravention and on continuation of offence Rs.25 for every day. INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYMENT 
(STANDING ORDERS) ACT, 1946 
CHECK LIST 
Matters to be provided in Standing Orders 
* Classification of workmen, e.g., whether permanent, temporary, apprentices, probationers, 
or badiis. 
* Manner of intimating to workmen periods and hours of work, holidays, pay-days and wage 
rates. 
* Shift working. 
* Attendance and late coming. 
* Conditions of, procedure in applying for, and the authority which may grant, leave and 
holidays. 
* Requirement to enter premises by certain gates, and liability to search. 
* Closing and re-opening of sections of the industrial establishments, and temporary 
stoppages of work and the right and liabilities of the employer and workmen arising 
therefrom. 
* Termination of employment, and the notice thereof to be given by employer and workmen. 
* Suspension or dismissal for misconduct, and acts or omissions which constitute 
misconduct. 
* Means of redressal for workmen against unfair treatment or wrongful exactions by the 
employer or his agents or servants. 
Additional Matters 
* Service Record - Matters relating to service card, token tickets, certification of service, 
change of residential address of workers and record of age * Confirmation * Age of 
retirement » Transfer » Medical aid in case of Accident * Medical Examination * Secrecy 
* Exclusive service. 
Secs. 2(g), 3(2) and Rule 2A 
Posting of Standing 
Orders 
The text of the standing 
orders as finally certified 
shall prominently be 
posted in English or in the 
language understood by 
majority of workmen on Date of 
Operation of 
Standing Orders 
On the date of 
expiry of 30 days 
from certification 
or on the expiry of 
7 days from Procedure for Certification 
of Standing Orders 
Certifying Officer to forward 
a copy of draft standing 
orders to the trade union or 
in the absence of union, to 
the workmen of the industry. 
The trade union or the other 
representatives, as the case authentication of special board at or near 
may be, are to be heard. Standing Orders. the entrance for majority 
Sec.5 Sec. 7 of workers. 
Sec. 9 
Payment of Subsistence Allowance to the 
Suspended Workers 
* At the rate of fifty per cent, of the wages which the 
workman was entitled to immediately preceding the date 
of such suspension, for the first ninety days of 
suspension. 
* At the rate of seventy-five percent of such wages for 
the remaining period of suspension if the delay in the 
completion of disciplinary proceedings against such 
workman is not directly attributable to the conduct of 
such workman. Sec. 10-A Temporary 
application of Model 
Standing Orders 
Temporary application 
of mod standing orders 
shall be deemed to be 
adopted till the 
standing orders as 
submitted are certified. 
Sec. 12-A 
Sec. 13 


11A. Industrial 
Employment (Standing 
Orders) Act, 1946 
_———————____——- 
WHAT ARE STANDING ORDERS 
The Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 is the 
first Central enactment with an object to have unjform Standing 
Orders providing for matters enumerated in the Schedule to the 
Act. The employers are required to define, with certainty, 
conditions of service in their establishments to reduce them in 
writing and to get them certified with a view to avoid unnecessary 
industrial disputes. It was not intended that there should be 
different conditions of service for those who are employed before 
and those employed after Standing Orders came into force. Once 
the Standing Orders come into force, they bind all those presently 
in employment of concerned establishment as well as those who 
are appointed thereafter. The employer cannot enter into an 
agreement with a workman which is inconsistent with the 
Standing Orders of the company. The terms of the Standing 
Orders would prevail over the corresponding terms in the contract 
of service. The employer cannot enforce simultaneously the 
Standing Orders regulating the classification of workmen and a 
special agreement with an individual workman settling his 
categorisation. 
146B 


Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 146C 
SUBMISSION FOR CERTIFICATION OF DRAFT STANDING ORDERS 
After having prepared the draft Standing Orders, the next step 
is to get the same certified by the concerned Certifying Officer by 
submitting the same as per provisions of section 3 of the Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946. 
The employer is required to submit to the Certifying Officer, five 
copies of the draft Standing Orders for certification. The Certifying 
Officer after having gone through in between lines of the draft 
Standing Orders, will certify them if the provisions are 
enumerated therein in respect of each and every aspect 
incorporated in the schedule applicable to the employer's 
establishment and secondly the provisions made in the Standing 
Orders are in conformity with the provisions of the Act, z.e., the 
provisions of the proposed Standing Orders are, as far as possible, 
in line with the model Standing Orders. In other words, the 
minimum benefits or advantages offered to the workmen under 
the provisions of the Act and Rules framed thereunder, including 
the model Standing Orders, should be provided for in the draft 
Standing Orders sought to be certified. It does not mean that 
something more, than what is provided for in the model Standing 
Orders, cannot be provided by the employer. Even the Certifying 
Officer has powers to effect increase in any of the provisions of the 
draft Standing Orders in the interest of workmen while making 
adjudication upon the fairness or reasonableness of the 
provisions of any Standing Order giving reasons thereof, as held 
by the Allahabad High Court. 
PROCEDURE FOR CERTIFICATION OF STANDING ORDERS 
(1) On receipt of the draft under section 3, the Certifying 
Officer shall forward a copy thereof to the trade union, if any, of 
the workmen, or where there is no such trade union, to the 
workmen in such manner as may be prescribed, together with a 


146D Labour Laws 
notice in the prescribed from requiring objections, if any, which 
the workmen may desire to give for the draft Standing Orders to be 
submitted to him within fifteen days from the receipt of the notice. 
(2) After giving the employer and the trade union or such 
other representatives of the workmen, as may be prescribed, an 
opportunity of being heard, the Certifying Officer shall decide 
whether or not any modification of or addition to the draft 
submitted by the employer is necessary to render the draft 
Standing Orders certifiable under the Act, and shall make an 
order in writing accordingly. 
(3) The Certifying Officer shall, thereupon, certify the draft 
Standing Orders, after making any modifications therein which 
his order under sub-section (2) may require and shall, within 
seven days thereafter, send copies of the certified Standing Orders 
authenticated in the prescribed manner and of his order under 
sub-section (2) to the employer and to the trade union or other 
prescribed representatives of the workmen. 
DATE OF OPERATION OF STANDING ORDERS 
Standing Order shall, unless an appeal is preferred under 
section 6, come into operation on the expiry of thirty days from the 
date on which authenticated copies thereof are sent under sub- 
section (3) of section 5, or where an appeal as aforesaid is 
preferred, on the expiry of seven days from the date on which 
copies of the order of the Appellate Authority are sent under sub- 
section (2) of section 6. 
REGISTER OF STANDING ORDERS 
A copy of all Standing Orders, as finally certified under the Act, 
shall be filed by the Certifying Officer in a register in the 
prescribed form maintained for the purpose and the Certifying 
Officer shall furnish a copy thereof to any person applying 
therefor on payment of the prescribed fee. 


Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 146E 
POSTING OF STANDING ORDERS 
The text of the Standing Orders, as finally certified under the 
Act, shall be prominently posted by the employer in English and 
in the language understood by the majority of his workmen on 
special boards to be maintained for the purpose at or near the 
entrance through which the majority of the workmen enter the 
industrial establishment and in all departments thereof where the 
workmen are employed. 
DURATION AND MODIFICATION OF STANDING ORDERS 
(1) Standing Orders finally certified under the Act shall not, 
except or agreement between the employer and the workmen or a 
trade union or other representative body of the workmen, be liable 
to modification until the expiry of six months from the date on 
which the Standing Orders or the last modification thereof came 
into operation. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1), an employer or 
workman or a trade union or other representative body of the 
workmen may apply to the Certifying Officer to have the Standing 
Orders modified and such application shall be accompanied by 
five copies of the modifications proposed to be made and where 
such modifications are proposed to be made by agreement 
between the employer and the workmen, a certified copy of that 
agreement shall be filed alongwith the application. 
(3) The foregoing provisions of the Act shall apply in respect 
of an application under sub-section (2) as they apply to the 
certification of the first Standing Orders. 
(4) Nothing, contained in sub-section (2), shall apply to an 
industrial establishment in respect of which the appropriate 
Government is the Government of the State of Gujarat or the 
Government of the State of Maharashtra. 


146F Labour Laws 
TEMPORARY APPLICATION OF MODEL STANDING ORDERS 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 3 to 12 for 
the period commencing on the date on which the Act becomes 
applicable to an industrial establishment and ending with the 
date on which the Standing Orders as finally certified under this 
Act come into operation under section 7 in that establishment, 
the prescribed model Standing Orders shall be deemed to be 
adopted in that establishment and the provisions of section 9, 
sub-section (2) of section 13 and section 13A shall apply to such 
model Standing Orders as they apply to the Standing Orders so 
certified. 
(2) Nothing, contained in sub-section (1), shall apply to an 
industrial establishment in respect of which the appropriate 
Government is the Government of the State of Gujarat or the 
Government of the State of Maharashtra. 
CERTIFIED STANDING ORDERS BECOME STATUTORY CONDITIONS 
OF SERVICE 
The Supreme Court has held that if any provision of such 
rules read with Standing Orders confer absolute and unfettered 
discretion on the employer to allow or disallow rightful claim of 
employees, that would be unfair and unreasonable as also 
arbitrary and subject to test of Article 14. It was further observed 
as follows:— 
“The Standing Order Act endeavoured to impose a 
statutory contract of service between two parties unequal to 
negotiate, on the footing of equality. The Standing Orders 
certified under the Act become part of the statutory terms 
and conditions of service between the employer and his 
employee and they govern the relationship between the 
parties. A facet of collective bargaining is that any 
settlement arrived at between the parties would be treated 
as incorporated in the contract of service of each employee 
governed by the settlement. A presumption of more or less 
systematic translation of the results of collective bargaining 
into individual contracts is created where these results are 
in practice operative and effective in controlling the terms 
on which employment takes place. As soon certified 
Standing Orders which statutorily prescribe the conditions 
of service shall be deemed to be incorporated in the 
contract of employment of each employee with his 
employer.' 
1. Sudhir Chandra Sarkar v. Tata Iron and Steel Co. Ltd., 1984 (3) SCC 369. 


Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 146G 
INCONSISTENCE BETWEEN CONTRACT OF EMPLOYMENT AND 
CERTIFIED STANDING ORDERS - LATTER WILL PREVAIL 
On the question as to whether the provision contained in the 
certified Standing Orders will prevail in case of its conflict with 
the terms and conditions contained in the contract of 
employment, 1.e., appointment letter, it is necessary to bear in 
mind that certified Standing Orders are framed under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 and once 
the Standing Orders are framed by the employer and certified, 
they have the force of law. As against them conditions of service 
contained in the letter of appointment or contract of employment 
do not have statutory force. When there is a conflict between a 
provision of law or an instrument having the force of law and the 
contract entered into between the parties, the former will 
prevail.’ The Rajasthan High Court has followed the judgment of 
the Supreme Court? where exactly an identical question has 
arisen for decision. 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE - SECTION 13 
(1) An employer, who fails to submit draft Standing Orders as 
required by section 3 or who modifies his Standing Orders 
otherwise than in accordance with section 10, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, and in the 
case of a continuing offence with a further fine which may 
extend to two hundred rupees for every day after the first during 
which the offence continues. 
(2) An employer, who does any act in contravention of the 
Standing Orders finally certified under Act for his industrial 
establishment, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to 
one hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing offence with 
a further fine which may extend to twenty-five rupees for every 
day after the first during which the offence continues. 
(3) No prosecution for an offence punishable under this 
section shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of 
the appropriate Government. 
(4) No court, inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or 
Judicial Magistrate of the second class, shall try any offence 
under this section. 
1. Eicher Good Earth Ltd. v. Rajendra Kumar Soni, 1993 LLR 524 (Raj HC). 
2. Western India Match Co. Ltd. v. Workmen, AIR 1973 SC 2650: (27) FLR 228. 




MATERNITY 
CHECKLIST 
Coverage of the Act 
Upon all women employees either employed directly or 
through contractor except domestic women employees 
employed in mines, factories, plantations and also in other 
establishments if the State Government so decides. 
Therefore, if the State Government decides to apply this Act Object of the Act 
To protect the dignity of 
motherhood and the 
dignity of a new 
person's birth by 
providing for the full and 
healthy maintenance of 
the woman and her 
child at this important 
time when she is not to women employees in shops and commercial 
benefit of this Act. Bihar, Punjab 
Andhra have done so. Kk . Ses one = VS Sec.3 
Cash Benefits 
+ Leave with average pay for six weeks before the delivery. 
* Leave with average pay for six weeks after the delivery. 
* A medical bonus of Rs.25 if the employer does not provide free medical 
care to the woman. 
* An additional leave with pay up to one month if the woman shows proof of illness due to 
the pregnancy, delivery, miscarriage, or premature birth. 
* Incase of miscarriage, six weeks leave with average pay from the date of miscarriage. 
Non Cash Benefits/Privileges 
* Light work for ten weeks (six weeks plus one month) before the date of 
her expected delivery, if she asks for it. 
* Two nursing breaks in the course of her daily work until the child is 
15 months old. 
* No discharge or dismissal while she is on maternity leave. 
* No change to her disadvantage in any of the conditions of her employment while 
on maternity leave. 
* Pregnant woman discharged or dismissed may still claim maternity benefit from the 
employer. 
Exception : Women dismissed for gross misconduct lose their right under the Act for 
Maternity Benefit. Sec.7 &8 
Leave for illness arising out of 
pregnancy etc. 
A woman suffering from illness arising 
our of pregnancy, delivery, premature 
birth of child (miscarriage, medical 
termination of pregnancy or tubectomy 
operation) be entitled, in addition to the 
period of absence allowed to her leave 
with wages at the rate of maternity 
benefit for a maximum period of one 
month. Sec.10 Leave for Miscarriage and 
Tubectomy Operation 
* Leave with wages at the rate of 
maternity benefit, for a period of six 
weeks immediately following the day of 
her miscarriage or her medical 
termination of pregnancy. 
* Entitled to leave with wages at the 
rate of maternity benefit for a period of 
two weeks immediately following the 
day of her tubectomy operation. 
Secs.9 & 13 
Prohibition of dismissal during absence of pregnancy 
* Discharge or dismissal during or on account of such absence or to give notice 
of discharge or dismissal on such a day that the notice will expire during such 
absence, or to vary to her disadvantage any of the conditions of her service. 
* At the time during her pregnancy, if the woman but for such discharge or 
dismissal would have been entitled to maternity benefit or medical bonus, etc. 
* Not barred in case of dismissal for gross misconduct. 
Sec.12 
Failure to Display 
Extract of Act 
imprisonment may extend 
to one year or fine maternity benefit for such period. 
Rs.5,000. BENEFIT ACT, 1961 
establishments, they also will get the 
Haryana, West engal, U.P., Orissa and 
Forfeiture of maternity benefit 
* If permitted by her employer to absent herself under the provisions of section 6 
for any period during such authorized absence, she shall forfeit her claim to the Conditions for 
eligibility of 
benefits 
Women indulging 
temporary or 
unmarried are eligible 
for maternity benefit 
when she is expecting 
a child and has 
worked for her 
employer for at least 
80 days in the 12 
months immediately 
preceding the date of 
her expected delivery. 
Sec.5 
Condition for Claiming 
Benefits 
* Ten weeks before the 
date of her expected 
delivery, she may ask the 
employer to give her light 
work for a month. At that 
time she should produce a 
certificate that she is 
pregnant. 
* She should give written 
notice to the employer 
about seven weeks before 
the date of her delivery 
that she will be absent for 
six weeks before and after 
her delivery. She should 
also name the person to 
whom payment will be 
made incase she cannot 
take it herself. 
* She should take the 
payment for the first six 
weeks before she goes on 
leave. 
* She will get payment for 
the six weeks after child- 
birth within 48 hours of 
giving proof that she has 
had a child. 
* She will be entitled to 
two nursing breaks of 
fifteen minutes each in the 
course of her daily work 
till her child is fifteen 
months old. 
* Her employer cannot 
discharge her or change 
her conditions of service 
while she is on maternity 
leave. 
Sec.5 
* For discharging or dismissing such a woman during or on account of her absence 
from work, the employer shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be 
less than 3 months, but it will extend to one year and with fine, not exceeding 
Sec. 18 


12. The Maternity Benefit 
Act, 1961 .————_—- 
THE OBJECT 
The object of maternity leave and benefit is to protect the dignity 
of motherhood by providing for the full and healthy maintenance 
of woman and her child when she is not working. As the number 
of women employees is growing, maternity leave and other 
maternity benefits are becoming increasingly common. 
In 1961, the Maternity Benefit Act was passed aiming at a 
uniform maternity benefit all over the country. By an amendment 
No. 29 of 1995 effective from 1-2-1996 a female employee will be 
eligible for leave with wages for 6 weeks in case of miscarriage or 
medical termination of pregnancy or production of such proof. 
APPLICABILITY OF THE ACT ; 
The Maternity Benefit Act applies } in the first instance, to every 
establishment being a factory/ mine or plantation including any 
such establishment belonging to Government and jto every 
establishment wherein persgns are employed for the exhibition of 
equestrian acrobatic and-other performances, to every shop or 
establishment within the meaning of any law for the time being in 
force in relation to shops and establishments in a State, in which 
ten or more persons are employed, or were employed on any day 
of the preceding twelve months. 
148 


The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 149 
However, the State Government, may, with the approval of the 
Central Government, after giving not less than two months’ notice 
of its intention of so doing, by notification in the Official Gazette . 
declare that all or any of the provisions of the Act shall apply also 
to any other establishment or class of establishment, industrial, 
commercial, agricultural or otherwise. Save as otherwise provided 
in sections 5A and 5B pertaining to continuance of or payment of 
maternity benefit in certain cases nothing contained in this Act 
shall apply to any factory or other establishment to which the 
provisions of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 apply for 
the time being. 
IMPORTANT TERMS AND EXPRESSIONS 
I. “child” includes a still born child; 
Il. “delivery” means the birth of a child; 
Ill. “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 
IV. “State Government”, in relation to a Union Territory, 
means the Administrator thereof; 
V. “Wages” means all remuneration paid or payable in cash 
to a woman, if the terms of the contract of employment, 
express or implied, were fulfilled and includes— 
such cash allowances (including dearness allowance 
and house rent allowance) as a woman is for the time 
being entitled to; incentive bonus; and the money 
value of the concessional supply of foodgrains and 
other articles, 
but does not include— 
(a) any bonus other than incentive bonus; 
(b) overtime earnings and any deduction or payment 
made on account of fines; 
(c) any contribution paid or payable by the employer to 
any pension fund or provident fund or for the benefit 
of the woman under any law for the time being in 
force; and 
(d) any gratuity payable on the termination of service; 
VI. “woman” means a woman employed, whether directly or 
through any agency, for wages in any establishment; 


150 
XI. 
XIL. Labour Laws 
“employer” means — 
(a) in relation to an establishment which is under the 
control of the Government, a person or authority 
appointed by the Government for the supervision and 
control of employees or where no person or authority 
is So appointed the head of the department; 
(b) in relation to an establishment under any local 
authority, the person appointed by such authority for 
the supervision and control of employees or where no 
person is so appointed the chief executive officer of 
the local authority; 
(c) in any other case, the person who, or the authority 
which has the ultimate control over the affairs of the 
establishment and where the said affairs are 
entrusted to any other person whether called a 
manager, managing director, managing agent, or by 
any other name, such person; 
. “small establishment” means — 
(a) a factory; 
(b) amine; 
(c) a plantation; 
(d) an establishment wherein persons are employed for 
the exhibition of equestrian, acrobatic and other 
performances; or 
(e) ashop or establishment; or 
(f) an establishment to which the provisions of this Act 
have been declared under sub-section (1) of section 2 
to be applicable; 
. “factory” means a factory as defined in clause (m) of 
section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948); 
. “Maternity Benefit” means the payment referred to in sub- 
section (1) of section 5; 
“Mine” means a mine as defined in clause (j) of section 2 
of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952); 
“Miscarriage” means expulsion of the contents of a 
pregnant uterus at any period prior to or during the 
twenty-sixth week of pregnancy but does not include any 


The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 151 
miscarriage, the causing of which is punishable under the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); 
XIII. “Plantation” means a plantation as defined in clause (f) 
of section 2 of the Plantation Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 
1951). 
PROHIBITION OF WORK OR EMPLOYMENT BY WOMEN. | DURING 
CERTAIN PERIOD 
(i) No employer shall knowingly employ a woman in an 
establishment during the six weeks immediately 
following the day of her delivery or her miscarriage. 
(ii) No woman shall work in any establishment during the 
six weeks immediately following the day of her delivery 
or her miscarriage. 
(iii) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 6, no 
pregnant woman shall, on a request being made by her in 
this behalf, be required by her employer to do during the 
period specified in sub-section (iv) (herein below) and 
work which is of an arduous nature or which involves 
long hours of standing or which in any way is likely to 
interfere with her pregnancy or the normal development 
of the foetus or is likely to cause her miscarriage or 
otherwise to adversely affect her health. 
(iv) The period referred to in clause (iii) shall be— 
(a) the period of one month immediately preceding the 
period of six weeks, before the date of her expected 
delivery; 
(b) any period during the said period of six weeks for 
which the pregnant woman does not avail of leave of 
absence under section 7. 
ENTITLEMENT TO PAYMENT OF MATERNITY BENEFIT 
(i) Subject to the provisions of this Act, every woman shall be 
entitled to, and her employer shall be liable for, the 
payment of maternity benefit at the rate of the average 
daily wage for the period of her actual absence, this is to 
say, the period immediately preceding the day of her 
delivery, the actual day of her delivery and the period 
immediately following that day. 


152 
(ii) 
(iii) Labour Laws 
Explanation—For the purpose of this sub-section, the ~ 
average daily wage means the average of the woman’s 
wages payable to her for the days on which she has 
worked during the period of three calendar months, 
immediately preceding the date from which she absents 
herself on account of maternity, the minimum rate of wage 
fixed or received under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 
of 1948). 
No woman shall be entitled to maternity benefit unless 
she has actually worked in an establishment of the 
employer from whom she claims maternity benefit, for a 
period of not less than eighty days in the twelve months 
immediately preceding the date of her expected delivery: 
Provided that the qualifying period of eighty days 
aforesaid shall not apply to a woman who has 
immigrated into the State of Assam and was pregnant at 
the time of the immigration. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of calculating under this 
sub-section the days on which a woman has actually 
worked in the establishment, the days for which she has 
been laid off or was on holidays declared under any law 
for the time being in force to be holidays with wages 
during the period of twelve months immediately 
preceding the date of her expected delivery shall be taken 
into account. 
The maximum period for which any woman shall be 
entitled to maternity benefit shall be twelve weeks of 
which not more than six weeks shall precede the date of 
her expected delivery: 
Provided that where a woman dies during this period, 
the maternity benefit shall be payable only for the days 
upto and including the day of her death: 
Provided further that where a woman having been 
delivered of a child, dies during her delivery or during the 
period immediately following the date of her delivery for 
which she is entitled for the maternity benefit, leaving 
behind in either case the child, the employer shall be 
liable for the maternity benefit for that entire period but if 
the child also dies during the said period, then for the 
days upto and including the date of the death of the child. 


The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 153 
CONTINUANCE OF PAYMENT OF MATERNITY BENEFIT IN CERTAIN 
CASES 
Every woman entitled to the payment of maternity benefit 
under this Act shall, notwithstanding the application of the 
Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), to the factory or 
other establishment in which she is employed, continue to be so 
entitled until she becomes qualified to claim maternity benefit 
under section 50 of the Act. 
PAYMENT OF MATERNITY BENEFIT IN CERTAIN CASES 
Any woman 
(a) who is employed in a factory or other establishment to 
which the provisions of the Employees’ State Insurance 
Act, 1948 (34 of 1948) apply; 
(b) whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) 
for a month exceed the amount specified in sub-clause (b) 
of clause (9) of section 2 of the Act; and 
(c) who fulfils the conditions specified in sub-section (2) of 
section 5, 
shall be entitled to the payment of maternity benefit under this 
Act. 
NOTICE OF CLAIM FOR MATERNITY BENEFIT AND PAYMENT 
THEREOF 
(1) Any woman employed in an establishment and entitled to 
maternity benefit under the provisions of this Act may give notice 
in writing in such form as may be prescribed, to her employer, 
stating that her maternity benefit and any other amount to which 
she may be entitled under this Act may be paid to her or such 
person as she may nominate in the notice and that she will not 
work in any establishment during the period for which she 
receives maternity | benefit. 
(2) In the case of a woman who is pregnant, such notice shall 
state the date from which she will be absent from work, not being 
a date earlier than six weeks from the date of her expected 
delivery. 
(3) Any woman who has not given the notice when she was 
pregnant may give such notice as soon as possible after the 
delivery. 


154 Labour Laws 
(4) On receipt of the notice, the employer shall permit such 
woman to absent herself from the establishment during the period 
for which she receives the maternity benefit. 
(5) The amount of maternity benefit for the period preceding the 
date of her expected delivery shall be paid in advance by the 
employer to the woman on production of such proof as may be 
prescribed that the woman is pregnant, and the amount due for 
the subsequent period shall be paid by the employer to the woman 
within forty-eight hours of production of such proof as may be 
prescribed that the woman has been delivered of a child. 
(6) The failure to give notice under this section shall not 
disentitle a woman to maternity benefit or any other amount 
under this Act if she is otherwise entitled to such benefit or 
amount and in any such case an Inspector may either of his own 
motion or on an application made to him by the woman, order the 
payment of such benefit or amount within such period as may be 
specified in the order. 
PAYMENT OF MATERNITY BENEFIT IN CASE OF DEATH OF A 
WOMAN 
If a woman entitled to maternity benefit or any other amount 
under this Act, dies before receiving such maternity benefit or 
amount, or where the employer is liable for maternity benefit 
under second proviso to sub-section (3) of section 5, the employer 
shall pay such benefit or amount to the person nominated by the 
woman in the notice given under section 6 and in case there is no 
such nominee, to her legal representative. 
PAYMENT OF MEDICAL BONUS 
Every woman entitled to maternity benefit under this Act shall 
also be entitled to receive from her employer a medical bonus of 
two hundred and fifty rupees, if no pre-natal confinement and 
post-natal care is provided for by the employee free of charge. 
LEAVE FOR MISCARRIAGE, MEDICAL TERMINATION OF 
PREGNANCY AND TUBECTOMY OPERATION 
In case of miscarriage, a woman shall on production of such 
proof as may be prescribed, be entitled to leave with wages at the 
rate of maternity benefit, for a period of six weeks immediately 
following the day of her miscarriage. 


The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 155 
In case of miscarriage or medical termination of pregnancy, a 
woman shall, on production of such proof as may be prescribed, 
be entitled to leave with wages at the rate of maternity benefit, for a 
period of six weeks immediately following the day of her 
miscarriage or, as the case may be, her medical termination of 
pregnancy. 
In case of tubectomy operation, a woman shall, on production 
of such proof as may be prescribed, be entitled to leave with wages 
at the rate of maternity benefit for a period of two weeks 
immediately following the day of her tubectomy operation. 
LEAVE FOR ILLNESS ARISING OUT OF PREGNANCY, DELIVERY, 
PREMATURE BIRTH OF CHILD, OR MISCARRIAGE 
A woman suffering from illness arising out of pregnancy, 
delivery, premature birth of child or miscarriage shall, on 
production of such proof as may be prescribed, be entitled, in 
addition to the period of absence allowed to her under section 6, 
or as the case may be, under section 9 to leave with wages at the 
rate of maternity benefit for a maximum period of one month. 
NURSING BREAKS 
Every woman delivered of a child who returns to duty after 
such delivery shall, in addition to the interval for rest allowed to 
her, be allowed in the course of her daily work two breaks of the 
prescribed duration for nursing the child until the child attains 
the age of fifteen months. 
PROHIBITION FOR DISMISSAL DURING ABSENCE DUE TO 
PREGNANCY 
(i) When a woman absents herself from work in accordance 
with the provisions of the Maternity Benefit Act, it shall be 
unlawful for her employer to discharge or dismiss her 
during or on account of such absence or to give notice of 
discharge or dismissal on such a day that the notice will 
expire during such absence, or to vary to her 
disadvantage any of the conditions of her service. 
(ii) The discharge or dismissal of a workman, at any time 
during her pregnancy, if the woman but for such 
discharge or dismissal would have been entitled to 
maternity benefit or medical bonus referred to in section 8 
of the Act, shall not have the effect of depriving her of the 
maternity benefit or medical bonus: 


156 Labour Laws 
Provided that where the dismissal is for any prescribed gross 
misconduct, the employer may, by order in writing communicated | 
to the woman, deprive her of the maternity benefit or medical 
bonus or both. However, any woman deprived of maternity benefit 
or medical bonus or both, or discharged or dismissed during or on 
account of her absence from work in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, may, within sixty days from the day on 
which the order of such deprivation or discharge or dismissal is 
communicated to her, appeal to such authority as may be 
prescribed, and the decision of that authority on such appeal, 
whether the woman should or should not be deprived of 
maternity benefit or medical bonus or both or discharged or 
dismissed shall be final. 
WAGES NOT TO BE DEDUCTED 
No deduction from the normal and usual daily wages of a 
woman entitled to maternity benefit under the provisions of this 
Act shall be made by reason only of— 
(a) the nature of work assigned to her by virtue of the 
provisions contained in sub-section (3) of section 4, or 
(b) breaks for nursing the child allowed to her under the 
provisions of section 11 of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961. 
FORFEITURE OF MATERNITY BENEFIT 
If a woman works in any establishment after she has been 
permitted by her employer to absent herself under the provisions 
of section 6 for any period during such authorised absence, she 
shall forfeit her claim to the maternity benefit for such period. 
EXHIBITION OF ABSTRACTS OF THE ACT 
An abstract of the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder in the language of the locality shall be exhibited in a 
conspicuous place by the employer in every part of the 
establishment in which women are employed. 
MAINTENANCE OF MUSTER-ROLLS BY ESTABLISHMENT OF MINES 
AND CIRCUS 
(a) The employer of every mine or circus in which women are 
employed shall prepare and maintain a muster-roll in 
Form ‘A’ and shall enter therein particulars of all women 
workers in the mine or circus. 


The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 157 
(b) All entries in the muster-roll shall be made in ink and 
maintained upto-date and it shall always be available for 
inspection by the Inspector during working hours. 
(c) The employer may enter in the muster-roll such other 
particulars as may be required for.any other purpose of 
the Act. 
SUBMISSION OF RETURNS BY MINES AND CIRCUS 
(a) The employer of every mine or circus shall on or before the 
21st day of January in each year submit to the Competent 
Authority a return in each of the Forms ‘L’, ‘M’, ‘N’ and 
‘O’ giving information as to the particulars specified in 
respect of the preceding year. 
(b) If the employer of a mine or circus to which the Act 
applies sells, abandons, or discontinues the working of 
the mine or circus he shall, within one month of the date 
of sale or abandonment or four months of the date of 
discontinuance, as the case may be, submit to the 
Competent Authority a further return in each of the said 
forms in respect of the period between the end of the 
preceding year and the date of sale, abandonment or 
discontinuance. 
PENALTY FOR CONTRAVENTION OF ACT BY EMPLOYER 
(1) If any employer fails to pay any amount of maternity benefit 
to a woman entitled under this Act or discharges or dismisses 
such woman during or on account of her absence from work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment which shall not be less than three months but 
which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be 
less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to five 
thousand rupees : 
Provided that the court may, for sufficient reasons to be 
recorded in writing, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a 
lesser term or fine only in lieu of imprisonment. 
(2) If any employer contravenes the provisions of this Act or the 
rules made thereunder, he shall, if no other penalty is elsewhere 
provided by or under this Act for such contravention, be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both: 


158 Labour Laws 
Provided that where the contravention is of any provision 
regarding maternity benefit or regarding payment of any other 
amount and such maternity benefit or amount has not already 
been recovered, the court shall, in addition recover such maternity 
benefit or amount as if it were a fine and pay the same to the 
person entitled thereto. 
PENALTY FOR OBSTRUCTING INSPECTOR 
Whoever fails to produce on demand by the Inspector any 
register or document in his custody kept in pursuance of this Act 
or the rules made thereunder or conceals or prevents any person 
from appearing before or being examined by an Inspector shall be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year or 
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both. 


Applicability of the Act 
MINES ACT, 1932 rrougho na bt ra to apply in certain cases. 
CHECKLIST Sec. 3 
{ 
Duties and 
responsibility of the Provisions as to health 
and safety 
Drinking water, Compensatory 
day of rest 
Within a month Notice to be given on minor 
operation 
By owner, agent or manager betore Owners, Agent, and 
Managers 
* Making financial & other 
provisions of taking such 
steps as may be 
necessary. 
* To comply with the 
instructions of the 
Authorities. the commencement of any minor 
operation to the Chief Inspector 
Sec. 16 Conservancy, Medical 
appliances etc. 
Secs. 19, 20 & 21 of the day 
work. 
Sec. 29 
Notice of 
certain 
diseases Notice of accident 
Whenever there occurs in or about a mine - 
4 * an accident causing loss of life or serious bodily injury, or 
* an explosion, ignition, spontaneous heating, outbreak of fire or 
irruption or inrush of water or other liquid matter, or 
* an influx of inflammable or noxious gases, or 
* a breakage of ropes, chains or other gear by which persons or 
materials, are lowered or raised in a shaft or an incline, or 
* an over winding of cages or other means of conveyance in any 
shaft while persons or materials are being lowered or raised, or 
* a premature collapse of any part of the workings, or 
* any other accident which may be prescribed. 
Sec. 23 Sec. 18 
Extra wages for 
overtime 
Twice of ordinary rate of 
Prohibition of employment 
of certain persons 
When working in other mine 
within prescribed 12 hours. 
Sec. 34 Weekly day of 
rest 
On more than 6 
days working ina 
week. 
Sec. 28 Hours of work above ground 
Not more than 5 hours continuously 
and the spread over will be 12 
hours to be extended to 14 hours 
under special circumstances. 
Sec. 30 
Notice of 
hours of work ours of work below 
ground 
Below ground not 
more than 48 hours in 
any week. Exemption of persons 
* Below 18 years of age. 
e Apprentices and other 
trainees not below 16 years of age. 
Sec. 38 Limitation of daily hours 
and work within 
overtime 
Not more than 10 hours in any 
day inclusive of overtime. 
Payment in advance in certain 
cases 
When leave allowed for not less 
than 4 days payment to be made. Employment of women Annual leave with wages 
Prohibited in any part of mine which is 15 days per annum when below 
below ground, in any mine above ground ground or one day for every 20 
except between 6 a.m. to 7 p.m. days of work. 
Falsification of records etc. Imprisonment upto 3 months or with fine upto Rs.1000. 
Use of false certificate of fitness Imprisonment upto one month or with fine upto Rs.200. 
Omission to furnish return Fine upto Rs.1000. 
Provisions of Sec.38 pertaining to Imprisonment upto 3 months or fine upto Rs.1000 
exemption from provision regarding 
employment 
Sec. 68 Providing employment of persons 
below 18 years of age 
Failure to give notice of accident Imprisonment upto 3 months. Fine upto Rs.500. 
* Contravention of law with dangerous * Imprisonment upto two years or fine upto Rs.5000. 
results, when contravention results 
in loss of life. 
* When contravention results in 
serious injuries. 
* When contravention to persons 
employed in the mine or other 
persons in or about the mine. Fine upto Rs.500. 
Sec. 72-C * Imprisonment upto one year or fine upto Rs.3000. 
* Imprisonment upto 3 months or with fine upto 
Rs.3000 
Imprisonment upto 3 months or with fine upto Rs.1000 General Provisions of disobeyance of 
orders 
Enhancement penalty for previous Imprisonment double than the punishment prescribed. 
conviction 


13. The Mines Act, 1952 »_———_——___——- 
THE OBJECT 
The Mines Act, 1952 seeks to regulate the working conditions 
in mines by providing for measures to be taken for the safety of 
workers employed therein and certain amenities for them. 
MEANING OF A MINE 
“Mine” means any excavation where any operation for the 
purpose of searching for or obtaining minerals has been or is 
being carried on and includes— 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) all borings, bore holes, oil wells and necessary crude 
conditioning plants, including the pipe conveying 
mineral oil within the oilfields; 
all shafts, in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine, 
whether in the course of being sunk or not; 
all levels and inclined planes in the course of being 
driven; 
all open cast working; 
all conveyors or aerial ropeways provided for the 
bringing into or removal from mine of minerals or other 
articles or for the removal of refuse therefrom; 
all adits, levels, planes, machinery, work railwavs, 
tramways and sidings in or adjacent to and belonging to 
a mine; 
all protective works being carried out in or adjacent to a 
mine; 
160 


The Mines Act, 1952 161 
(viii) all workshops and stores situated within the precincts of 
a mine and under the same management and used 
primarily for the purposes connected with that mine or a 
number of mines under the same management; 
(ix) all power stations, transformer sub-stations, convertor 
stations, rectifier stations and accumulator storage 
stations for supplying electricity solely or mainly for the 
purpose of working the mine or number of mines under 
the same management; 
(x) any premises for the time being used for depositing sand 
or other material for use in a mine or for depositing refuse 
from a mine or in which any operations in connection 
with such sand, refuse or other material is being carried 
on, being premises exclusively occupied by the owner of 
the mine; 
(xi) any premises in or adjacent to and belonging to a mine on 
which any process ancillary to the getting, dressing or 
preparation for sale of minerals or of coke is being carried 
on. 
HOURS OF WORK, REST INTERVAL, WEEKLY OFF AND OVERTIME, 
ETC. 
The Act limits hours of work of adult workers to 9 per day and 
48 per week if employed above ground and 8 per day and 48 per 
week, if employed below ground. The maximum daily spread-over 
in the case of surface workers has been fixed at 12 hours and in 
the case of underground workers at 8 hours. Slightly longer hours 
of work have been prescribed for certain categories of 
underground workers, viz., pump-minders, on-setters or 
attendants of continuously operated machines. In their case, a 
maximum of 54 hours week has been prescribed and their daily 
hours of work and spread-over have been fixed at 9. Under the 
Act, no adult worker employed above ground is allowed to work 
continuously for more than five hours unless he is given a rest 
interval of at least half an hour. No person employed in the mine 
is allowed to work for more than six days in a week. If the worker 
is deprived of one or more weekly days of rest as a result of 
exception provided in the Act, he has to be given an equal number 
of compensatory days of rest within two months. 


162 Labour Laws 
Regarding overtime work, the Act provides that except in the 
case of an emergency involving serious risk to the safety of a mine 
or persons employed therein, no person shall be allowed to work 
for more than 10 hours in a day inclusive of overtime. Persons 
employed above and below ground are entitled to payment at a 
uniform rate of twice the ordinary rate of wages for overtime work. 
The period of overtime work is to be calculated on daily or weekly 
basis whichever is more favourable to the worker. For this purpose 
the ordinary rate of wages includes any dearness allowance and 
compensation in cash including such compensation, if any, 
accruing through the free issue of food grains. 
LEAVE WITH WAGES 
A person employed in a mine shall be entitled, in addition to 
weekly rest or festival holidays, to leave with wages after a 
calendar year’s service, at the rate of one day for every 16 days of 
work performed by him, if employed below ground, and one day 
for every 20 days of work in the case of other categories of workers. 
A calendar year’s service will, in the case of person engaged in 
underground work, means not less than 190 attendances at the 
mine and in the case of others 240 attendances. A person, whose 
service commences otherwise than on the first day of January, 
shall be entitled to leave with wages if he has put in, during the 
remaining calendar year, attendance for not less than half of the 
total number of days if employed below ground and for not less. 
than two-thirds of the total number of days in any other case. 
Wages for leave period shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily 
average of his total full time earnings for the days on which he 
was employed during the months immediately preceding his 
leave, exclusive of any overtime wages and bonus but inclusive of 
_ any dearness allowance and compensation in cash accruing 
through free issue of food grains and other articles. Days of lay-off 
by agreement or contract or as permissible under the Standing 
Orders; maternity leave not exceeding 12 weeks; and the leave 
earned in the year prior to that in which the leave is enjoyed shall 
be deemed to be the days on which the employee has worked ina 
mine for the purpose of computing his attendances. 
Any person employed in a mine who has been allowed leave 
for not less than 4 days, shall, before his leave begins, be paid the 
wages due for the period of leave allowed. Any leave not taken by 


The Mines Act, 1952 163 
a person in one calendar year shall be added to the leave to be 
allowed during the succeeding calendar year provided that the 
total number of days of leave which may be accumulated by any 
person shall not at any one time exceed 30 days. 
In case, where Central Government is satisfied that the leave 
rules applicable to persons employed in a mine are not less 
favourable than those provided in the Act, it may exempt the mine 
from all or any of the provisions of the Act as far as they relate to 
leave with wages. 
DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS, AGENTS AND 
MANAGERS 
(1) The owner and agent of every mine shall each be 
responsible for making financial and other provisions and for 
taking such other steps as may be necessary for compliance with 
the provisions of this Act and the regulations, rules, bye-laws and 
orders made thereunder. 
(2) The responsibility in respect of matters provided for in the 
rules made under clauses (d), (e) and (p) of section 58 shall be 
exclusively carried out by the owner and agent of the mine and by 
such person (other than the manager) whom the owner or agent 
may appoint for securing compliance with the aforesaid 
provisions. 
(3) If the carrying out of any instructions given under sub- 
section (2) or given otherwise than through the manager under 
sub-section (3) of section 17, results in the contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or of the regulations, rules, bye-laws or 
orders made thereunder, every person giving such instructions 
shall also be liable for the contravention of the provisions 
concerned. 
In spite of the fact that section 17 provides that there shall be a 
manager for every mine it does not lessen the responsibility of all 
those persons who are directly concerned with the functioning of 
the mines. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), the 
owner, agent and manager of every mine shall each be responsible 
to see that all operations carried on in connection with the mine, 
are conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of 
the regulations, rules, bye-laws and orders made thereunder. 


164 Labour Laws 
(5) On the event of any contravention by any person whosoever, 
of any of the provisions of this Act or of the regulations, rules, bye- 
laws or orders made thereunder except those which specifically 
require any person to do any act or thing or prohibit any person 
from doing an act or thing, besides the person who contravenes, 
each of the following persons shall also be deemed to be guilty of 
such contravention unless he proves that he had used due 
diligence to secure compliance with the provisions and had taken 
reasonable measures to prevent such contravention : 
(i) the official or officials appointed to perform duties of 
supervision in respect of the provisions contravened; 
(ii) the manager of the mine; 
(iii) the owner and agent of the mine; 
(iv) the person appointed, if any, to carry out the 
responsibility under sub-section (2): 
Provided that any of the person aforesaid may not be proceeded 
against if it appears on inquiry and investigation, that he is not 
prima facie liable. 
(6) It shall not be a defence in any proceedings brought against 
the owner or agent of a mine under this section that the manager 
and other officials have been appointed in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act or that a person to carry out the 
responsibility under sub-section (2) has been appointed. 
HEALTH AND SAFETY OF WORKERS 
(a) Drinking water 
(1) In every mine effective arrangements shall be made to 
provide and maintain at suitable points conveniently situated a 
sufficient supply of cool and wholesome drinking water for all 
persons employed therein: 
Provided that in the case of persons employed below ground 
the Chief Inspector may in lieu of drinking water being provided 
and maintained at suitable points, permit any other effective 
arrangement to be made for such supply. 
(2) All such points shall be legibly marked “Drinking Water” in 
a language understood by a majority of the persons employed in 
the mine and no such point shall be situated within six metres of 
any washing place and urinal or latrine, unless a shorter distance 
is approved in writing by the Chief Inspector. 


The Mines Act, 1952 165 
(3) In respect of all mines or any class or description of mines, 
the Central Government may make rules for securing compliance 
with the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) and for the 
examination by prescribed authorities of the supply and 
distribution of drinking water. 
(b) Conservancy 
(1) There shall be provided, separately for males and females in 
every mine, a sufficient number of latrines and urinals of 
prescribed type so situated as to be convenient and accessible to 
persons employed in the mine at all times. 
(2) All latrines and urinals provided under sub-section (1) shall 
be adequately lighted, ventilated and at ail times maintained in a 
clean and sanitary condition. ! 
(3) The Central Government may specify the number of latrines 
and urinals to be provided in any mine, in proportion to the 
number of the males and females employed in the mine and 
provide for such other matters in respect of sanitation in mines 
(including the obligation in this regard of persons employed in the 
mine), as it may consider necessary in the interests of the health of 
the persons so employed. 
(c) Medical Appliances 
(1) In every mine there shall be provided and maintained so as 
to be readily accessible during all working hours such number of 
first-aid boxes or cupboards equipped with such contents as may 
be prescribed. 
(2) Nothing except the prescribed contents shall be kept in a 
first-aid box or cupboard or room. 
(3) Every first-aid box or cupboard shall be kept in the charge of 
a responsible person who is trained in such first-aid treatment as 
may be prescribed and who shall always be readily available 
during the working hours of the mine. 
(4) In every mine there shall be made so as to be readily 
available such arrangements as may be prescribed for the 
conveyance to hospitals or dispensaries of persons who, while 
employed in the mine, suffer bodily injury or become ill. 
(5) In every mine wherein more than one hundred and fifty 
persons are employed, there shall be provided and maintained a 
first-aid room of such size with equipment and in the charge of 
such medical and nursing staff as may be prescribed. 


166 Labour Laws 
NOTICE OF ACCIDENTS 
(1) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine— 
(a) an accident causing loss of life or serious bodily injury; or 
(b) an explosion, ignition, spontaneous heating, outbreak of 
fire or irruption or inrush of water or other liquid matter; 
or 
(c) an influx of inflammable or noxious gases; or 
(d) a breakage of ropes, chains or other gear by which 
persons or materials are lowered or raised in a shaft or an 
incline; or 
(e) an over winding of cages or other means of conveyance in 
any shaft while persons or materials are being lowered or 
raised; or 
(f) a premature collapse of any part of the workings; or 
(g) any other accident which may be prescribed, 
the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall give notice of the 
occurrence to such authority and in such form and within such 
time as may be prescribed, and he shall simultaneously post one 
copy of the notice on a special notice board in the prescribed 
manner at a place where it may be inspected by trade union 
officials and shall ensure that the notice is kept on the board for 
not less than fourteen days from the date of such posting. 
(1A) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine an accident 
causing reportable injury to any person, the owner, agent or 
manager of the mine shall enter in a register such occurrence in 
the prescribed form and copies of such entries shall be furnished 
to the Chief Inspector once in a quarter. 
(2) Where a notice given under sub-section (1) relates to an 
accident causing loss of life, the authority shall make an inquiry 
into the occurrence within two months of the receipt of the notice 
and, if the authority is not the Inspector he shall cause the 
Inspector to make an inquiry within the said period. 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that accidents other than those specified in sub- 
sections (1) and (1A) which cause bodily injury resulting in the 
enforced absence from work of the person injured for a period 
exceeding twenty-four hours shall be entered in a register in the 
prescribed form or shall be subject to the provisions of sub-section 
(1) or sub-section (1A), as the case may be. 


The Mines Act, 1952 167 
(4) A copy of the entries in the register referred to in sub-section 
(3) shall be sent by the owner, agent or manager of the mine, on or 
before the 20th day of January in the year following that to which 
the entries relate, to the Chief Inspector. 
(5) Whenever there occurs in or about a mine an accident 
causing loss of life or serious bodily injury to any person, the 
place of accident shall not be disturbed or altered before the 
arrival or without the consent of the Chief Inspector or the 
Inspector to whom notice of accident is required to be given under 
sub-section (1) of section 23, unless such disturbance or alteration 
is necessary to prevent any further accident, to remove bodies of 
the deceased, or to rescue any person from danger, or unless 
discountinuance of work at the place of accident would seriously 
impede the working of the mine: 
Provided that where the Chief Inspector or the Inspector fails to 
inspect the place of accident within seventy-two hours of the time 
of the accident, work may be resumed at the place of the accident. 
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS BELOW EIGHTEEN 
YEARS OF AGE, ETC. 
(1) After the commencement of the Mines (Amendment) Act, 
1983, no person below eighteen years of age shall be allowed to 
work in any mine or part thereof. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) 
apprentices and other trainees, not below sixteen years of age, 
may be allowed to work, under proper supervision, in a mine or 
part thereof by the manager: 
Provided that in the case of trainees, other than apprentices, 
prior approval of the Chief Inspector or an Inspector shall be 
obtained before they are allowed to work. 
Explanation.—In this section and in section 43, “apprentice” 
means an apprentice as defined in clause (a) of section 2 of the 
Apprentices Act, 1961(52 of 1961). 
CONDITIONS FOR EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN 
(1) No woman shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
any law, be employed— 
(a) in any part of a mine which is below ground; 
(b) in any part of mine above ground except between the 
hours of 6 a.m. and 7 p.m. 


168 Labour Laws 
(2) Every woman employed in a mine above ground shall be 
allowed an interval of not less than eleven hours between the 
termination of employment on any one day and _ the 
commencement of the next period of employment. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the 
Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, 
vary the hours of employment above ground of women in respect 
of any mine or class or description of mines, so, however, that no 
employment of any woman between the hours of 10 p.m. and 5 
a.m. is permitted thereby. 
REGISTERS OF PERSONS EMPLOYED 
(1) For every mine there shall be kept in the prescribed form and 
place a register of all persons employed in the mine showing in 
respect of each such persons— 
(a) the name of the employee with the name of his father or, of 
her husband, as the case may be, and such particulars as 
may be necessary for purpose of identification; 
(b) the age and sex of the employee; 
(c) the nature of employment (whether above ground or 
below ground and if above ground, whether in open cast 
workings or otherwise) and the date af commencement 
thereof; 
(d) such other particulars as may be prescribed; 
and the relevant entries shall be authenticated by the signature or 
the thumb impression of the person concerned. 
(2) The entries in the register prescribed by sub-section (1) shall 
be such that workers working in accordance therewith would not 
be working in contravention of any of the provisions of 
Chapter VI. 
(3) No person shall be employed in a mine until the particulars 
of such person is furnished and no person shall be employed 
except during the periods of work shown in respect of him in the 
register. 
(4) For every mine other than a mine which, for any special 
reason to be recorded, is exempted by the Central Government by 
general or special order, there shall be kept in the prescribed form 
and place separate registers showing in respect of each person 
employed in the mine: 


The Mines Act, 1952 169 
(a) below ground; 
(b) below ground in open cast workings; and 
(c) above ground in other cases:— 
(i) the name of the employee; 
(ii) the class or kind of his employment; 
(iii) where work is carried on by a system of relays, the 
shift to which he belongs and the hours of the shift. 
(5) The register of persons employed below ground referred to 
in sub-section (4) shall show at any moment the name of every 
person who is then present below ground in the mine. 
Note: No person shall enter any open cast working or any 
working below ground unless: he has been permitted by the 
manager or is authorised under this Act or any other law to do so. 
TO PASTE ABSTRACTS FROM THE ACT, REGULATIONS, ETC. 
These shall be kept pasted at or near every mine in English and 
in such other language or languages as may be prescribed, the 
prescribed abstracts of the Act and of the regulations and rules. 
PENALTIES 
(a) Obstruction: 
(1) Whoever obstructs the Chief Inspector, Inspector or any 
person authorised under section 8 in the discharge of his duties, 
under this Act, or refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the Chief 
Inspector, Inspector or such person any reasonable facility for 
making any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry authorised 
by or under this Act in relation to any mine, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, 
or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both. 
(2) Whoever refuses to produce on the demand of the Chief 
Inspector or Inspector any registers or other documents kept in 
pursuance of this Act, or prevents or attempts to prevent or does 
anything which he has reason to believe to be likely to prevent any 
person from appearing before or being examined by an inspecting 
officer acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act, shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees. 


170 Labour Laws 
(b) Falsification of records: 
Whoever— 
(a) counterfeits, or knowingly makes a false statement in any 
certificate, or any official copy of a certificate, granted 
under this Act; or 
(b) knowingly uses as true any such counterfeit or false 
certificate; or 
(c) makes or produces or uses any false declaration, 
statement or evidence knowing the same to be false, for 
the purpose of obtaining for himself or of any other 
person a certificate or the renewal of a certificate, under 
this Act, or any employment in a mine; or 
(d) falsifies any plan, section, register or record, the 
maintenance of which is required by or under this Act or 
produces before any authority such false plan, action, 
register or record, knowing the same to be false; or 
(e) makes, gives or delivers any plan, return, notice, record or 
report containing a statement, entry or detail which is not 
to the best of his knowledge or belief true, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees or with both. 
(c) Omission to furnish plans: 
Any person who, without reasonable excuse the burden of 
proving which shall lie upon him, omits to make or furnish in the 
prescribed form or manner or at or within the prescribed time any 
plan, section, return, notice, register, record or report required by 
or under this Act to be made or furnished shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
(d) Contravention of provisions regarding employment of labour: 
Whoever, save as permitted by section 38, contravenes any 
provision of this Act or of any regulation, rules or bye-law or of 
any order made thereunder prohibiting, restricting or regulating 
the employment or presence of person in or about a mine shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. ee ee ee ee 


The Mines Act, 1952 171 
(e) Penalty for employment of persons below eighteen years of age: 
If a person below eighteen years of age is employed in a mine in 
contravention of section 40, the owner, agent or manager of such 
mine shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees. 
(—) Failure to appoint manager: 
Whoever, in contravention of the provisions of section 17, fails 
to appoint a manager shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may 
extend to two thousand and five hundred rupees, or with both. 
Non-appointment of a qualified manager is violation of section 
17, and hence punishable. 
(g) Special provision for contravention of certain regulations: 
Whoever contravenes any provision of any regulation or of any 
bye-law or of any order made thereunder, relating to matter 
specified in clauses (d), (i), (m), (n), (0), (p), (1), (s) and (u) of section 
57 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, -or with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rupees, or with both. 
(h) Special provision for contravention of orders under section 22: 
Whoever continues to work in a mine in contravention of any 
order issued under sub-section (1A), sub-section (2) or sub-section 
(3) of section 22 or under sub-section (2) of section 22A shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to 
the contrary to be recorded in writing in the judgment of the court 
such fine shall not be less than two thousand rupees. 
(i) Special provision for contravention of law with dangerous 
results: 
(1) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any 
regulation, rule or bye-law or of any order made thereunder other 
than an order made under sub-section (1A) or sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (3) of section 22 or under sub-section (2) of section 22A 
shall be punishable— 


172 Labour Laws 
(a) if such contravention results in loss of life, with 
imprisonment which may extend to two years, or with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with 
both; or 
if such contravention results in serious bodily injury, with 
imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine 
which may extend to three thousand rupees, or with both; 
or (b — 
(c) if such contravention otherwise causes injury or danger to 
persons employed in the mine or other persons in or 
about the mine, with imprisonment which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both: 
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to 
the contrary to be recorded in writing in the judgment of the court, 
such fine, in the case of a contravention referred to in clause (a), 
shall not be less than three thousand rupees. — 
(2) Where a person having been convicted under this section is 
again convicted thereunder, he shall be punishable with double 
the punishment provided by sub-section (1). 
(3) Any court imposing or confirming in appeal, revision or 
otherwise a sentence of fine passed under this section may, when 
passing judgment, order the whole or any part of the fine 
recovered to be paid as compensation to the person injured, or in 
the case of his death, to his legal representative: 
Provided that if the fine is imposed in a case which is subject to 
appeal, no such payment shall be made before the period allowed 
for presenting the appeal has elapsed, or, if an appeal has been 
presented, before the decision of the appeal. 
(j) General provision for disobedience of orders: 
Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any 
regulation, rule or bye-law or of any order made thereunder for the 
contravention of which no penalty is hereinbefore provided, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both. 
If there is a breach in the maintenance of the creche it is not the 
owner alone but his agent and manager shall also be liable for the 
breach. 


The Mines Act, 1952 173 
(k) Enhanced penalty after previous conviction: 
If any person who has been convicted for an offence punishable 
under any of the foregoing provisions (other than sections 72B 
and 72C) is again convicted for an offence committed within two 
years of the previous conviction and involving a contravention of 
the same provision, he shall be punishable for each subsequent 
conviction with double the punishment to which he would have 
been liable for the first contravention of such provision. 




QW MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 1948 CHECKLIST 
Fixation of Minimum Rates of Wages 
* The appropriate government to fix minimum rates of wages. The employees employed 
under part-| or part-ll of Schedule. 
* To make review at such intervals not exceeding five years the minimum rates or so 
fixed and revised the minimum rates. Object of the Act 
To provide for fixing 
minimum rates of 
wages in certain 
employments. 
Government can also fix Minimum Wages for 
* Time Work ¢ Piece work at piece rate *« Piece work for the purpose of securing to 
such employees ona time work basis * Overtime work done by employees for piece 
work or time rate workers. Minimum Rates of 
Wages 
Such as 
* Basic rates 
of wages etc. 
* Variable DA and 
* Value of other Sec. 3 
Payment of Minimum Composition of Procedure for fixing and 
concessions etc. revising Minimum Rates of Committee Rates of Wages 
Wages Representation of 
Sec. ¢ Appointing Committee employer and Employer to pay to 
every employee 
engaged in scheduled 
employment at a rate employee in scheduled 
employment in equal 
number and * Issue of Notificatio 
etc. = f Fixing Hours for Sec. 5 
Normal Working 
* Shall constitute a 
normal working day, 
inclusive of one or 
more specified 
intervals. 
¢ To provide fora 
day of rest in every 
period of seven days 
with remuneration. Overtime 
* To be fixed by the hour, by 
the day or by such a longer 
wage-period works on any 
day in excess of the number 
of hours constituting a normal 
working day. | 
¢ Payment for every hour or independent persons 
not exceeding 1/3rd or 
its total number one 
such person to be 
appointed by the 
Chairman. 
Sec. 9 not less than minimum 
rates of wages as fixed 
by Notification by not 
making deduc- (7= 
tion other than 
prescribed. 
Sec. 12 
Wages of workers who work for less than normal for part of an hour so worked 
working days in excess at the overtime rate 
double of the ordinary rate 
(1% times for agriculture 
labour) 
Sec. 14 ¢ To provide for 
payment for work ona 
day of rest ata rate 
not less than the 
overtime rate. 
Sec. 13 
Wages for two classes of work Save as otherwise hereinafter provided, be entitled to 
receive wages in respect of work done by him on that 
day as if he had worked for a full normal working day. 
Register of Fines - Form! Rule 21(4) 
Annual Returns - Form III Rule 21 (4-A) 
Register for Overtime - Form 1V Rule 25 - 
Register of Wages - Form X, Wage slip - Form XI, Muster 
Roll - Form V Rule 26 
Representation of register - for three years Rule 26-A. 
Sec. 18 Where an employee does two or more classes 
of work to each of which a different minimum 
rate of wages is applicable, wages at not less 
than the minimum rate in respect of each such 
class. 
Sec. 16 
Claims by employees Minimum time rate wages for 
piece work 
* To be filed before authority constituted under the Act within 6 months. 
* Compensation upto 10 rupees Not less than minimum rates wages 
as fixed 
Sec. 17 
For paying less than minimum rates 
of wages 
For contravention of any provisions 
pertaining to fixing hours for normal 
working day etc Punishment 
Imprisonment upto 6 months or 
with fine upto Rs.500/- or both 


14. The Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948 agit ane ene 
‘Wages’ are remuneration which the workers are entitled for the 
work performed by them. The employers always think of how to 
decrease the production costs while the workers see wages in 
terms of their pre-occupations, better housing, children’s 
education, medical requirements, minimum recreations, provision 
for old age, marriage, etc. Our Constitution also enjoins on the 
Government to endeavour to secure conditions of work ensuring a 
decent standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure, social and 
cultural opportunities. The Minimum Wages Act is a landmark 
legislation for regulating of wages in the country. 
THE OBJECT 
The object with which the Minimum Wages Act was passed 
has been more concisely and precisely stated in the preamble of 
the Act. In other words this Act has been passed to provide for 
fixing minimum rates of wages in certain employments and the 
provisions of the Act are intended to achieve the object of doing 
social justice to the workers employed in the scheduled 
employments by prescribing minimum rates of wages for them. In 
brief the Act purports to achieve to prevent exploitation of labour 
and for that purpose the authorities under the Act have been 
empowered to take steps to prescribe minimum rates of wages in 
the scheduled industries. 
176 


The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 177 
MINIMUM RATES OF WAGES 
The minimum rates of wages may be fixed for different 
scheduled employments, different classes of work in the same 
scheduled employment, adults, adolescents, children and 
apprentices and for different localities. 
The Act is being implemented by the Central and State 
Governments, and as such both are empowered to frame rules. In 
the text references only to rules of Central Government are made. 
Employers may have to refer to rules of a State Government if 
industry comes within the jurisdiction of that Government. 
Minimum rate of the wages fixed or revised consists of the 
following:— 
(i) a basic rate of wages and a special allowance, viz., cost of 
living allowance; 
(ii) a basic rate of wages with or without cost of living 
allowance and cash value of concessions for supplies of 
essential commodities; 
(iii) an all inclusive rate, i.e, basic rate, cost of living 
allowance and cash value of concessions. 
In the case of the Workmen represented by Secretary v. Management 
of Reptekose Brett & Co. Ltd. reported in 1992 LLR, the Supreme 
Court has recommended additional components such as 
children’s education, medical requirements, minimum recreation 
and provision for old age, marriage, etc. 
The Government may fix the minimum rates of wages either by 
the hour, by the day, by the month or by such large wage-period as 
may be prescribed which may be revised at intervals and 
reviewed, if felt necessary. 
The employer must pay every employee wages so fixed as 
notified by the Government. 
WAGES MUST BE PAID IN CASH 
However, if there is a custom to pay a part or the whole of 
wages in kind, the Government may authorise payment either 
wholly or partly in kind. It can also authorise the supply of 
essential commodities at concessional rates. The Government may 
prescribe the manner of determining the cash value of wages in 
kind and of concessions in supplies of essential commodities at 


178 Labour Laws 
concessional rates. However, the matter of estimating the cash 
value of wages in kind and of concessions is to get the prices from 
the nearest market and compute accordingly. The cash value of 
concession in supplies of essential commodities at concessional 
rates is to be worked out according to the difference between the 
retail price of commodities at the nearest market and the price 
charged by the employer. 
MANNER AND PROCEDURE OF FIXING AND REVISING MINIMUM 
RATES OF WAGES 
For the fixation of minimum wages, the employment must have 
been in Schedule originally or added to the Schedule by a 
notification under section 27 of the Act. The Government may fix 
or revise minimum wages either by committee procedure or by 
notification procedure. 
Where notification method is adopted for fixation of revisions, 
the proposals are notified in the Official Gazette for the 
information of persons likely to be affected, specifying a date not 
less than two months from the date of notification, after which the 
proposals will be taken into consideration. In the case of revision 
by the notification method, the appropriate Government should 
consult the Advisory Board also. The employers may send their 
representations against the proposals so published. 
While resorting to committee procedure, the Government has to 
appoint committee consisting of equal number of representatives 
of employers and employees in the scheduled employment and 
independent persons not exceeding one-third of total number 
nominated by the Government. The committee holds inquiries and 
advises the Government regarding fixation and revision of 
minimum wages. In both the cases, rates recommended by the 
committee and accepted by Government or the rates determinated 
by Government after consideration of all representations should 
be published in the Official Gazette and shall come into force on 
expiry of 3 months from the date of notification unless otherwise 
provided. 
HOURS OF WORK AND HOLIDAYS 
Section 13 of the Act authorises the Government to fix the hours 
of work, a day of rest with remuneration and payment for the 
work done on a day of rest at the overtime rate. Under rules 20 to 


The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 179 
25 of the Minimum Wages (Central) Rules, 1950 applicable to 
scheduled employment the number of hours of work in a day 
should not exceed nine hours for an adult and 4-1/2 hours for a 
child. The working day of an adult worker shall be so arranged 
that inclusive of the interval of rest it shall not exceed 12 hours on 
any day. The number of hours of work for adolescent shall be 
fixed by the competent medical practitioner as approved by the 
Government which may either be equal to an adult or child. The 
ney should, however, not be allowed to work for more than 
4*/, hours on any day. 
In respect of other scheduled employments, for which the 
appropriate Government is State Government, the employers may 
refer to the rules prescribed by that Government. 
EXTRA WAGES FOR OVERTIME 
The employer can take actual work on any day upto nine hours 
in a 12 hours shift, but he must pay double the rates for any hour 
or part of an hour of actual work in excess of nine hours or for 
more than 48 hours in any week. 
REST DAY 
When a rule made under the Act provides for weekly rest day 
with wages, the workman must be allowed a day of rest in a week 
which should ordinarily be a Sunday or any other day of the week 
as rest day fixed by the employer. An employee could however, 
claim wages at overtime rate for working on a weekly rest day. 
This is available also to workmen on a piece-rate basis but in that 
case “average daily wages” would mean only the notified 
minimum daily wage and would not include extra earnings for 
output above the fixed minimum rate of wages. 
EMPLOYER’S OBLIGATIONS 
(1)As and when proposals for revision of the minimum wages 
are published in the Official Gazette, the employer may, if he feels 
necessary, send representations to the Government on the 
proposed revision. 
(2) Once the minimum wages are notified and become effective 
the employer must pay to every employee engaged in a scheduled 
employment under him wages at a rate not less than the minimum 
rate of wages fixed by such notification for that class of employees. 


180 Labour Laws 
(3) The employer may make deductions out of wages as may be 
authorised. 
(4) The employer shall pay overtime at double the ordinary rate 
of wages for the period of work done beyond nine hours on any 
day or 48 hours in any week or for rest day. 
(5) The employer should not employ a child for more than 
4'/, hours on any day. 
(6) The employer must pay minimum wages in cash unless the 
Government authorises their payment wholly or partly in kind. 
(7) The employer shall fix wage-period for the payment of 
wages at intervals not exceeding one month or such other larger 
period as may be prescribed. 
(8) The employer shall pay wages on a working day within 
seven days of the end of wage period or within 10 days if 1000 or 
more persons are employed in an establishment. 
(9) The employer shall pay the wages to a person discharged 
not later than the second working day after his discharge. 
(10) If an employee is employed on any day for a period less 
than the normal working day, he shall be entitled to receive wages 
for a full normal working day provided his failure to work is not 
caused by his unwillingness to work but by the omission of the 
employer to provide him work for that period. 
(11) Where an employee does two or more classes of work to 
each of which a different minimum rate of wage is applicable, the 
employer shall pay to such employee in respect of time 
respectively occupied in each such class of work, wages not less 
than the minimum rate in force in respect of each such class. 
(12) Where an employee is employed on piece work for which 
minimum time rate and not a minimum piece rate has been fixed, 
the employer shall pay to such employee wages at not less than 
the minimum time rate. 
(13) The employer shall fix working days of an adult worker 
which may be for a maximum of nine hours a day but this period 
shall not exceed 12 hours on any day. 
(14) The employer shall allow a rest day with wages to the 
employees every week which should ordinarily be Sunday or any 
other day as fixed by the employer. No employee shall be required 
to work on a day fixed as rest day, unless he is paid wages for that 


The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 181 
day at the overtime rate and is also allowed a substituted rest day 
with wages (Rule 23). 
(15) The employer shall not make deductions from wages 
except those authorised by or under the rules (Annexure 2). 
(16) Every employer shall maintain at the work spot a register 
of wages in the form prescribed specifying the following 
particulars for each wage period in respect of each employed 
person:— 
(a) minimum rate of wages payable; 
(b) the number of days in which overtime was worked; 
(c) the gross wages; : 
(d) the wages actually paid and the date of payment. 
(17) Every employer shall issue wage slips in the form 
prescribed containing prescribed particulars to every person 
employed. = 
(18) Every employer shall get the signature or the thumb 
impression of every person employed on the wage book and the 
wage slips. 
(19) The employer or his agent should authenticate the entries 
in the wage books and the wage slips. 
(20) The employer, intending to impose a fine on an employed 
person or to make deduction for damage or loss caused by him, 
shall inform personally and in writing to him giving an 
opportunity to offer any explanation in the presence of another 
person. The amount of the said fine or deduction shall also be 
intimated to him. 
(21) The employer shall ensure that all such fines imposed and 
deductions made shall be recorded in the registers in Forms I and 
II respectively. These registers should be kept at the work spot. 
Where no fines or deductions are imposed, a nil entry shall be 
made across the body of the relevant register. 
(22) The employer shall exhibit at main entrance to the 
establishment and its offices, a notice in respect of the following in 
English and local language in a clean and legible form:— 
(a) minimum rates of wages; 
(b) abstracts of the Acts and rules made thereunder; 
(c) name and address of the Inspector. 


182 Labour Laws 
(23) The employer shall preserve register of wages, muster-roll, 
register of fines, register of deductions for damage or loss and 
register of overtime for a period of three years after the date of last 
entry made therein. 
(24) The employer shall produce all such registers and record 
on demand before the Inspector. Where an establishment has been 
closed, the employers should produce such register in his office if 
asked for. 
REGISTERS, RECORDS, NOTICES, ABSTRACT AND RETURNS 
Every employer liable to pay minimum rate of wages in the 
scheduled employment, in terms of the relative Minimum Wages 
Notification is required to maintain— 
I. Register of wages containing the following particulars:— 
(i) the minimum rate of wages payable to each employee; 
(ii) number of days for which each employee worked 
overtime for each wage period; 
(iii) the gross wages of each employee for the wage period; 
(iv) all deductions from wages, showing the kinds of 
deduction; and 
(v) the wages actually paid to each employee for each 
period. 
Note: Signature/thumb impression of each employee 
is required to be obtained on the wage Register, when 
wages are paid. 
Entries in wage book are required to be authenticated 
by the employer or his authorised representative. 
Il. Register of overtime payment in Form IV. 
Il. Muster-Roll in Form V. 
IV. Register of Fines in Form I 
V. Register of deduction for damage or loss caused by the 
neglect or default of the employees. 
Every employer is required to— 
Put up a notice in Form XIII containing the minimum 
rate of wages fixed and keep it in clean and legible 
condition. 


The Minimum Wages Act, 1948 183 
Exhibit an extract of the Act and Rules thereunder with 
name and address of the Inspector in English and in the 
language understood by the majority of the employees. 
This should be kept clean and legible. (The Inspector will 
direct the place where notices and abstract, etc., are to be 
exhibited.) 
Give annual Return to the Labour Commissioner in Form III, 
and 
Exhibit a notice in Form XII in the public motor vehicles in case 
of employment in Public Motor Transport. 
SCHEDULED EMPLOYMENT 
The Minimum Wages Act used the expression Scheduled 
Employment section 2(g) and not the usual terms like industry, 
factory, shops, mine, etc. The emphasis is on the fact of 
employment of persons, irrespective of what itis called, which Act 
covers the activity or does not cover. If one or more persons are 
employed it could be covered provided it is included in the 
Schedule to the Act and the Government has not opted or 
refrained from fixing the minimum wages under the provisions of 
section 3(1A) of the Act. Only requirement is that the activity” 
employing one or more persons should have been included in the 
Schedule. 
Section 2 (g) of the Act reads as follows: 
“any employment specified in the Schedule; or any process 
or branch of work forming part of such employment”. 
Under this definition every single branch/section of the work is 
covered. For example the entry “employment in handloom 
industry” covers not just the employees working on a loom but 
warping, dyeing of yarn, preparation of spindles for use in 
weaving, folding of cloth, are also covered by the expression. If 
sales are made in the same premises as continuation of the 
process of handloom weaving, selling will also be covered by the 
entry. 
PENALTIES & PUNISHMENT FOR OFFENCES 
Section 22 covers the offences of employer like paying to his 
employees less than the minimum wages fixed to his class of work 
or fails to pay over time wages and for work done on the day of 


184 Labour Laws 
rest, etc. the punishment could be imprisonment upto six months 
or fine or both. 
Section 22B provides that cognizance of offence should be 
taken only when the Authority under Section 20 of the Act 
sanctions the application and the appropriate Government gives 
its sanction to file a complaint. 
Section 22C clarifies who could be held guilty in case the 
employer happens to be an incorporated body, firm, association of 
persons, etc. 
Section 22D deals with the case of payments found due to an 
employee who is dead or not traceable. 
The provisions of the Act are intended to achieve the objective 
of doing social Justice to workmen employed in the scheduled 
employments by prescribing the minimum rates of wages for them. 
! 


MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKERS 
ACT, 1961 CHECKLIST 
Running time 
In relation to a working day means the time from the momenta transport vehicle 
Starts functioning at the start of the working day until the moment when the transport 
vehicle ceases to function at the end of the working day, excluding any time during 
which the running of the transport vehicle is interrupted for a period exceeding such 
duration as may be prescribed during which period the persons who drive, or 
perform any other work in connection with the transport vehicle 
are free to dispose of their time as they please or are engaged in 
subsidiary work. Object of the Act 
To provide for the welfare 
of motor transport workers 
and to regulate the 
conditions of their work. 
Applicability of 
the Act 
Spread-over Canteens Rest room(s) t : saat thea ca Not more than 12 hours Where there are 100 or Wherein such transport undertaking ; : s in a day. more workers. workers are to employing five or more Sec. 16 halt at night motor transport workers e eae Sec. 9 ee or by a notification 
issued by the State 
Government. Medical facilities First aid facilities 
To be readily accessible during working hours a first 
aid box equipped with prescribed contents. Sec. 12 Sec. 1 To be readily available at 
operating centres and 
halting points. 
Sec. 11 Registration of motor 
transport undertaking Daily intervals for 
rest 
On an application for the After 5 hours working For drivers ? : Hours of work for J registration of a Motor oer phaaa for at least /% hour for conductors 
Transport Undertaking to an adult worker and to and checkers. Not more than6 hours a 
day including rest for % 
hour. 
Not to work between 10 
P.M. and 6 A.M. 
Sec. 14 the prescribed authority. 
Sec. 3 be allowed rest of at Sec. 10 
least 9 consecutive 
hours between the 
termination of duty on 
any day and the 
commencement of duty 
on the following day. Notice of hours of 
work 
To be displayed and 
correctly maintained by 
the employers. Split duty 
Not more than two spells. 
Sec. 17 
Compensatory da Hours of work ar rest ae Sec. 15 Sec. 18 
3 Within that particular 
Not more than 8 hours i onth. Prohibition of Payment of wages 
As per the provisions of 
the Payment of 
Wages Act, 1948. 
Extra wages for 
overtime twice his 
ordinary rates of any day and 48 hours in’ ke employment of children a week. Sec. 21 
Certificate of fitness for 
the adolescent 
By certifying Surgeon. To be permitted to work 
upto 10 hours and 54 
hours in a week. Medical examination 
At the instance of the 
Inspector any worker 
can be medically 
examined. In case of break down 
etc. the limitation can be Sec. 24 
prescribed. mh 
Sec. 13 Weekly rest Annual leave with wages 
Besides holidays and on working for 240 days - 
Adolescents employed as A day of rest One day for every 20 days of work performed by an adult worker 
motor transport workers in every during previous calendar year. 
to carry tokens and period of 7th For adolescent one day for every 15 days’ duty performed during 
certificate of fitness day. the calendar year. 
Sec. 22 Sec. 19 Sec. 27 
Cac ars Co eel Sec. 29 * Obstructing the Inspectors * Imprisonmert upto 3 months or fine upto Rs.500 or both. 
* Refusing to produce any register or other * Imprisonment upto 3 months or fine upto Rs.500. 
documents to the Inspector. 
Use of false certificate of fitness. Imprisonmert upto one month or fine upto Rs.50 or both. 
Sec. 31 Cortravertion of provisions regarding Imprisonment upto 3 months or fine upto As.500 or both and on 
: employmert of motor transport workers continuing contravertion Rs.75 per day for such cortravention 
Sec. 32 Wilfully disobeying any direction lawfully given by Imprisonmert upto 3 months or fine upto As.500 or with both 
any person or authority under the Act 
Enhanced penalties after previous conviction Imprisonment upto six months or fine upto Rs.1000 or with both 


15. The Motor Transport 
Workers Act, 1961 . 
THE OBJECT 
Though there are enactments such as Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 
and the Factories Act, 1948 which cover certain sections of motor 
transport workers and certain aspects of their conditions of 
employment, there has been no independent legislation applicable 
to motor transport workers as a whole for regulating the various 
aspects of their conditions of employment, work and wages. It was 
thus considered desirable to have a separate statute for motor 
transport workers which would cover matters like medical 
facilities, welfare facilities, hours of work, spread-over, rest 
periods, overtime, annual leave with pay, etc., on the analogy of 
similar enactments for workers in factories, mines and 
plantations. 
APPLICABILITY OF THE ACT 
The Act applies to motor transport undertakings employing 
five or more motor transport workers. 
The State Government may extend the provisions of the Act to 
any motor transport undertaking employing less than five motor 
transport workers. 
MOTOR TRANSPORT UNDERTAKING—SCOPE OF 
A “motor transport undertaking” means a motor transport 
undertaking engaged in carrying passengers or goods or both by 
186 


The Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 187 
road for hire or reward, and includes a private carrier. A “private 
carrier” is defined in the Motor Vehicles Act as denoting an owner 
of a transport vehicle other than a public carrier who uses that 
vehicle solely for the carriage of goods which are his property or 
the carriage of which is necessary for the purposes of his business 
not being a business of providing transport, or who uses the 
vehicle for any of the purposes specified in sub-section (2) of 
section 42 of that Act. 
MOTOR TRANSPORT WORKER 
A “motor transport worker” means a person who is employed 
in a motor transport undertaking directly or through an agency, 
whether for wages or not, to work in a professional capacity on a 
transport vehicle or to attend to duties in connection with the 
arrival, departure, loading or unloading of such transport vehicle 
and includes a driver, conductor, cleaner, station staff, line 
checking staff, booking clerk, cash clerk, depot clerk, timekeeper, 
watchman or attendant, but does not include any such person 
employed in a factory as defined in the Factories Act or any such 
person to whom Shops and Establishments Act apply. These two 
groups of excluded employees would however be taken into 
account for the purpose of determining whether an employer is 
bound to provide canteens. 
The Supreme Court has held that a Municipal Council which 
owned transport vehicles for carrying nights oil and for the 
distribution of water is a private carrier coming under the purview 
of the Act. However, the postal department using vehicles for 
carrying mails would not be a private carrier covered under the 
definition of a motor transport undertaking. The reasoning is tHat 
the postal department is not carrying on a business and therefore 
it cannot be said to use the vehicles for the carriage of goods 
necessary for its business. 
Exemptions: The Act does not apply to or in relation to any 
transport vehicle used— 
(i) for the transport of sick or injured persons; or 
(ii) for any purpose connected with the security of India, or 
the security of a State, or the maintenance of public order. 
In this context “public order” means public peace and 
tranquility. It does not include public safety or public 
health. 


188 Labour Laws 
The factory workers and those covered by Shops and 
Establishments Act do not come under the Act except for a very 
limited purpose. The Act has also empowered the Government to 
exempt— 
(i) motor transport workers who hold positions of 
supervision or management in any motor transport 
undertaking; 
(ii) part-time workers; and 
(iii) any class of employers, 
from the purview of the Act. 
The employees to whom the Shops and Commercial 
Establishments Act apply are outside the purview of the Motor 
Transport Workers Act. There have been conflicting decisions on 
the applicability of these two Acts to a motor transport 
undertaking. 
WELFARE FACILITIES 
(i) Canteens: The State Government may require in every place 
wherein 100 or more motor workers employed in a motor 
transport undertaking call on duty every day, to provide and 
maintain one or more canteens by the employer, and make rules 
regarding the date of providing the canteens, number of canteens, 
foodstuff to be served there and its prices and how it should be 
managed. 
(ii) Rest Rooms: Rest rooms are to be provided and maintained at 
every place where workers are required to halt at night, and these 
rooms should be sufficiently lighted and ventilated, and have 
such construction, accommodation and equipment as may be 
prescribed by the Government. 
(iii) Uniforms: An employer has also to provide uniforms for the 
drivers, conductors, and line checking staff employed in his 
undertaking. Raincoats or other like amenities may also be 
provided for their protection from rain or cold as may be specified . 
in the rules. Where no arrangement is made for washing uniforms, 
washing allowance is to be paid to them. 
MEDICAL AND FIRST-AID FACILITIES 
Every employer has to provide and maintain a first-aid box 
equipped with prescribed contents in every transport vehicle in 


The Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 _ 189 
the charge of the driver or conductor of the transport vehicle who 
is to be provided facilities for training in the use thereof. The 
employer has also to provide and maintain such medical facilities 
for the workers at such operating and halting stations as may be 
prescribed by the Government. 
HOURS OF WORK, REST INTERVALS AND SPREAD-OVER 
(i) Hours of Work: No adult worker is to be allowed to work for 
more than eight hours a day or forty-eight hours in any week. In 
case of running on long routes or on festive or other occasions, the 
workers may be allowed to work upto ten hours a day or 54 hours 
a week with the permission of the prescribed authority. The 
workers may also be required or allowed to work more than the 
prescribed hours if there is a breakdown or dislocation of a motor 
transport service, or if there is interruption of service, or an act of 
God. 
In the case of adolescents, daily hours are not to exceed six, and 
they are also not to be allowed to work between the hours of 
10 P.M: and 6 A.M. Their six hours working is also to include rest 
interval of half an hour. 
(ii) Rest Intervals: Every adult worker is to have rest of half an 
hour after working for five hours, if he is required to work for more 
than six hours on that day. Again, hours of work on each day are 
to be so fixed that the worker is allowed a period of rest of at least 
nine consecutive hours between the termination of duty on any 
one day and the commencement of duty on the next following day, 
except when there is breakdown or dislocation of a motor 
transport service or interruption of traffic or an act of God. 
(iii) Spread-over and Split Duty: The daily hours of work are not 
to spread-over for more than 12 hours in the case of adult, and 
nine hours in case of an adolescent, inclusive of interval for rest, 
except when there is breakdown or dislocation of service, or 
interruption of traffic. The hours of work should also not be split 
into more than two spells on any day, except as may be = 
by other provisions of the Act. 
WEEKLY REST DAY 
Every worker is to be given a day of rest in every period of seven 
days, unless his total period of employment is less than six days. 
If one has to work on the day of rest, it has to be seen that he does 


190 Labour Laws 
not work for more than ten days consecutively without a whole 
day of rest intervening. If an employer is granted exemption from 
this provision and the worker is deprived of his days of rest, he is 
to be allowed within the month in which the days of rest are due 
to him, or within two months immediately following that month, 
compensatory days of rest of equal number to the days of rest so 
lost. 
NOTICE OF HOURS OF WORK 
Every employer has to display a notice of hours of work in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed, and the workers are to 
work in accordance with the notice of hours of work so displayed, 
except as otherwise provided under this Act. 
EXTRA WAGES FOR OVERTIME 
If an adult motor transport worker works for more than 8 hours 
in any day, or if he is required to work on any day of rest to 
prevent any dislocation of service, he has to be paid wages at 
twice his ordinary rate of wages in respect of the overtime work or 
for the work done on the day of rest. If the overtime work results 
from any breakdown or dislocation of motor transport service or 
interruption of traffic or act of God, the worker will be entitled to 
wages in respect of overtime work at such rate as may be 
prescribed. For the purpose of overtime, the term “ordinary rates of 
wages” means basic wages and dearness allowances. 
EMPLOYMENT OF YOUNG PERSONS 
No child or person below the age of 15 years is to be employed 
in any capacity in any motor transport undertaking. 
An adolescent or a person between the age of 15 years and 18 
years, can be employed only if he is declared fit for employment in 
a motor transport undertaking by a certifying surgeon. This 
certificate is to be granted on the application of any adolescent or 
his guardian or his parent, and this is to be deposited with the 
employer. The certificate is to be valid for 12 months, and 
thereafter it is to be renewed. Any fee payable for obtaining 
certificate is to be paid by the employer, and is not to be recovered 
from the adolescent. The latter will have to carry with him a token 
showing the number of certificate while at work. An inspector 
appointed under this Act can get any motor transport worker 
examined by a certifying surgeon if he suspects that the worker 


The Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 191 
concerned is an adolescent, and he cannot work till he is certified 
to be fit for work. 
ANNUAL LEAVE WITH WAGES 
A motor transport worker who has worked for a period of 240 
days or more in a motor transport undertaking during a calendar 
year is to be allowed during the subsequent calendar year, leave 
with wages at the rate of one day for every 20 days of work 
performed by him in the previous calendar year if he is an adult, 
and at the rate of one day for every fifteen days of work performed 
if he is an adolescent. If the worker commences his service after the 
first day of January, he becomes entitled to leave if he has worked 
for two-thirds of the total number of days worked in the remainder 
of the calender year. If he is discharged or dismissed from service 
during the course of the year, he is entitled to the leave at the 
prescribed rate even if he has not worked for the period which 
entitled him to the earned leave. 
A motor transport worker can accumulate his earned leave 
upto thirty days if he is an adult, and upto forty days if he is an 
adolescent. 
Explanation —For the purposes of earned leave such leave does 
not include weekly holidays or holidays of festival or other similar 
occasions whether occurring during or at either end of the period 
of leave. 
WAGES FOR THE LEAVE PERIOD 
Wages for the earned leave are to be paid at the rate equal to the 
daily average of his total full time wages for the days on which he 
worked during the month immediately preceding his leave, 
exclusive of any overtime earning and bonus, but inclusive of 
dearness allowance and value of any concession for foodgrains 
supplied by the employer. The worker can have wages for the 
leave period in advance if the leave to be availed of is not for less 
than four days. The worker has to be paid wages in lieu of the 
leave refused to him. However, if motor transport worker is 
entitled to more favourable benefit in respect of leave and other 
matters under any agreement or any award, or any contract of 
service or otherwise than those provided by this Act, he will 
continue to be entitled to the more favourable benefits in respect of 
other matters under this Act. 


192 Labour Laws 
PENALTIES 
The Act stipulates penalties upto three months imprisonment 
and fine upto Rs. 500 for contraventions of the provisions of the 
Act and other offences, such as obstruction of inspector in 
performing his duty, or supplying of false information or 
documents. However, use of false certificate of fitness is 
punishable with imprisonment upto one month and fine upto 50 
rupees, or with both. If an offence is continued, it is punishable 
with additional fine of Rs. 75 per day, and for a repeated offence 
for which conviction has already been obtained, the punishment 
is doubled. 
Under this Act the Court can take cognizance of the offence if a 
complaint is made by an Inspector or with his approval, and that 
also if the complaint is filed within three months from the date the 
offence has come to the knowledge of the Inspector. 
OBLIGATIONS OF EMPLOYERS 
An employer is liable to— 
(a) provide such welfare amenities to motor transport 
workers as canteens, rest rooms, uniforms, first-aid and 
medical facilities as required under this Act and the rules 
framed thereunder; 
(b) observe restrictions in regard to working hours for adults 
and adolescents, and ensure the workers rest intervals, 
weekly rest and extra payment for overtime; 
(c) avoid employment of adolescents without fitness 
certificates from the certifying surgeon, and not to employ 
children below the age of 15 years; 
(d) ensure payment of wages to workers in accordance with 
the provisions of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936, and 
allow workers leave with wages as provided under this 
Act; 
(e) afford all reasonable facilities to the Chief Inspector and 
Inspectors for making any entry, inspection, examination 
or inquiry under this Act, and provide all necessary 
information and material required to see that the 
provisions of this Act are being observed; 
(f) apply and get his undertaking registered with the 
prescribed authority. 


PAYMENT OF BONUS ACT, 1965 @ CHECKLIST 
Applicability of Act 
Every factory wherein 10 or more persons are employed with the aid of 
power or Establishment 
Establishment includes 
departments, undertakings and 
An establishment in which 20 or more persons are employed without the aid branches, etc 
of power on any day during an accounting year. Sec. 1 
Separate establishment 
Components of Bonus Cqmputation of available surplus If profit and take accouniecire 
prepared and maintained in 
respect of any such 
department or undertaking or 
branch, then such.department 
or undertaking or branch is 
treated as a separate 
establishment. 
Sec. 3 * Income tax and direct taxes as payable Salary or wages includes 
dearness allowance but 
no other allowances e.g. 
over-time, house rent, 
incentive or commission. * Depreciation as per section 32 of Income 
Tax Act 
* Development rebate, 
investment or development 
| allowance 
Sec. 5 7k Sec. 2(21) 
Computation of gross 
profits 
Disqualification and Deduction of Bonus 
For banking company, 
On dismissal of an employee for as per First Schedule. 
* fraud; or 
* riotous or violent behaviour while on the 
premises of the establishment; or 
* theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any 
property of the establishment; or 
* Misconduct of causing financial loss to the 
employer to the extent that bonus can be 
deducted for that year. Secs.9 & 18 Others, as per AKC ’ 
— Second Schedule. 
Sec. 4 
Eligible Employees 
Employees drawing wages 
upto Rs. 10,000 per month or 
less. 
For calculation purposes 
Rs. 3,500 per month maximum 
will be taken even if an 
employee is drawing upto 
Rs. 10,000 per month. 
Sec. 12 Eligibility of Bonus Payment of Minimum Bonus 
| An employee will be entitled 8.33% of the salary or Rs.100 (on 
only when he has worked for completion of 5 years after 1st Accounting 
year even if there is no profit). 30 working days in that year 
Sec. 10 } 
a Sec. 8 
Set-off and Maintenance of Registers and Records etc. 
Set-on 
As per Schedule IV. 
Sec. 15 Time Limit for 
Payment of Bonus * AYegister showing the computation 
of the allocable surplus referred to in 
clause (4) of section 2, in Form A. Within 8B months from 
the close of accounting year * A register showing the set-on and 
set-off of the allocable surplus, under 
section 15, in Form B Submission of 
Return 
in Form D to the 
* A register showing the details of the amount of bonus 
due to each of the employees, the deductions under 
sections 17 and 18 and the amount actually disbursed, in 
Form C inspector within 30 
days of the expiry 
of time limit under 
Section 19 
Rule 5 Sec. 26, Rule 4 
PS ABET AAI SO Se ON aT EEO ON 
(aa me not applicable to certain employees of LIC, General Insurance, Dock Yards, Red Cross, Universities & 
/ ; 
| ee Educational Institutions, Chambers of Commerce, Social Welfare Institutions, Building Contractors, etc 
toe PENALTY Tae diate —————————— “ 
For contravention of any provision of the Act or the Rules | Upto 6 months or with fine upto Rs. 1000 Sec, 28 
—$—$——————————— 


16. The Payment of Bonus 
Act, 1965 Pon oe 
The Payment of Bonus Act applies to the persons employed 
in every factory and establishment employing not less than 20 
persons on any day during an accounting year. The 
establishments covered under the Act shall continue to pay bonus 
even if the number of employees falls below 20 subsequently. 
ELIGIBILITY FOR BONUS AND DEFINITION OF AN EMPLOYEE 
An ‘employee’ under the Act means any person other than 
apprentice, engaged for hire/reward whether the terms of 
employment be express or implied and includes supervisors / 
managerial and administrative employees drawing salary / wages 
not exceeding Rs. 10,000 per month. Every employee not 
drawing salary/wages beyond Rs. 10,000 per month who has 
worked for not less than 30 days in an accounting year, shall be 
eligible for bonus for a minimum of 8.33% of the salary /wages 
even if there is loss in the establishment whereas a maximum of 
20% of the employee’s salary/wages is payable as bonus in an 
accounting year. However, in case of the employees’ salary/ 
wage range of Rs. 3,500 to Rs. 10,000 per month for the purpose 
of payment of bonus, their salaries/ wages would be deemed to 
be Rs. 3,500 per month. 
194 


The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 195 
INFANCY BENEFIT FOR NEW ESTABLISHMENTS 
For the first five accounting years, following the accounting 
year in which the employer sells goods/renders services, bonus is 
payable only in respect of the accounting year, in which profits 
are made but the provisions of set on and set off would not apply. 
ELIGIBILITY FOR BONUS 
Subject to the above, the Payment of Bonus Act indicates that 
the following categories of persons will be entitled to bonus:— 
(a) skilled or unskilled or manual labour; 
(b) managerial staff; 
(c) supervisory staff; 
(d) administrative staff; 
(e) technical staff; and 
(f) clerical staff. 
An employee who has been engaged on hire or reward on terms 
which are either express or implied, and 
(i) his salary does not exceed Rs. 3500 per mensem, but he 
must have worked at least 30 working days in a year, 
(ii) who is not an apprentice, 
is entitled to bonus. 
Every person who falls within the definition of the term 
‘employee’ in section 2(13) of the Payment of Bonus Act will be 
entitled to bonus under the Payment of Bonus Act even if he is not 
a ‘workman’ under the definition of section 2(s) of Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947. 
EXTENT AND APPLICATION OF THE ACT 
The Payment of Bonus Act extends to the whole of India. Prior 
to the Central Labour Law (Extension to Jammu and Kashmir) Act, 
1970, this Act had no application to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 
The provisions of this Act shall apply to the following 
factories /establishments:— 
(i) The word ‘factory’ shall have the same meaning as in 
clause (m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948. Section 
2(m) of the Factories Act defines ‘factory’ as any premises 
including the precincts thereof (i) whereon ten or more 


196 Labour Laws 
workers are working, or were working on any day of the 
preceding twelve months and the manufacturing process 
is being carried on with the aid of power; or (i1) whereon 
twenty or more workers are working, or were working on 
any day of the preceding twelve months and _ the 
manufacturing process is being carried on without the aid 
of power. But the term ‘factory’ does not include a mine 
subject to the operation of the Mines Act, 1952 or a 
Railway running shed. 
(ii) Every other establishment in which twenty or more 
persons are employed on any day during an accounting 
year. An establishment in public sector means an 
establishment owned, controlled or managed by 
Government company as defined in section 67 of the 
Companies Act, 1956. Section 617 of the Companies Act 
defines a ‘Government company’ as a company in which 
not less than fifty-one per cent of the paid up share capital 
is held by the Central Government or by any State 
Government or Governments or jointly by the Central and 
State Governments. An establishment in public sector also 
means a Corporation in which not less than forty per cent 
of its capital is held whether singly or taken together by 
(i) the Government, or (ii) the Reserve Bank of India, or 
(iii) a Corporation owned by the Government or the 
Reserve Bank of India. On the other hand, an 
establishment in private sector means any establishment 
other than an establishment in public sector. 
APPLICABILITY OF ACT TO PUBLIC UNDERTAKINGS 
The Act also applies to public sector in certain cases. If in any 
accounting year an establishment in public sector sells any goods 
produced or manufactured by it or renders any services, in 
competition with an establishment in private sector and the 
income from such sales or services or both is not less than twenty 
per cent, of the gross income of the establishment in public sector 
for that year, then the provisions of this Act shall apply to such 
establishment in public sector. In other words, section 20 of the 
Act provides for the application of the bonus formula to those 
public sector establishments which fulfil the twenty per cent 
compensation test. Once the bonus formula is applied to such 


The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 197 
establishment, it shall continue to apply even if the 20 per cent 
compensation test is not satisfied in any subsequent accounting 
year. It is to be noted in this connection that an establishment 
engaged in any industry carried on by or under the authority of 
any department of the Central Government or a State Government 
or a local authority is not an “establishment in public sector”. 
EXEMPTED ESTABLISHMENTS 
The Act will not apply to the following classes of employees:— 
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
(viii) Employees employed by the Life Insurance Corporation of 
India. 
Seaman as defined in clause (42) of section 3 of the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 
Employees registered or listed under any scheme made 
under the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 
1948, and employed by registered or listed employers. 
Employees employed by an establishment engaged in any 
industry carried on by or under the authority of any 
department of the Central Government or a State 
Government or a local authority. 
Employees employed by (a) the Indian Red Cross Society 
or any other institution of a like nature (including its 
branches); (b) Universities and other educational 
institution; (c) Institutions (including Hospitals, 
Chambers of Commerce and _ Social Institutions) 
established not for the purpose of profit. 
Employees employed through contractors on building 
operations. 
Employees of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Employees of (a) the Industrial Finance Corporation of 
India, (b) any financial corporation established under 
section 3 or section 3A of the State Financial Corporation 
Act, 1951, (c) the Deposit Insurance Corporation, (d) the 
Agriculture Refinance Corporation, (e) the Unit Trust of 
India, (f) the Industrial Development Bank of India, 
(g) any other financial institution being an establishment 
in public sector which the Central Government notifies in 
the Official Gazette with regard to its capital structure, its 
objects, its extent of financial assistance and any other 
relevant factor. 


198 Labour Laws 
(ix) Employees of inland water transport establishments 
operating on routes passing through any other country. 
An appropriate Government is also empowered to exempt an 
establishment or class of establishments from the operation of all 
or any of the provisions of this Act provided appropriate 
Government is of the opinion that having regard to the financial 
position and other relevant circumstances, it would not be in the 
public interest to apply all or any of the provisions of the Act. The 
appropriate Government on taking decision of exemption will 
notify in the Official Gazette the period for which exemption is 
granted and specify therein conditions, if any, to be imposed on 
the exempted establishment. The exemption of an establishment 
from the operation of the Act by the appropriate Government 
depends on the conditions specified in section 36 of the Act. 
Power of exemption is to be exercised by the appropriate 
Government in a quasi-judicial manner. This section contemplates 
a determination and exercise of discretion as guided and limited 
by the provision itself. The discretion is not absolute and is 
justifiable. An order rejecting an application for exemption must 
be a speaking order. 
ACCOUNTING YEAR 
Section 2(1) of the Act defines accounting year as defined in 
relation to (i) a corporation, (ii) a Company, and (iii) any other 
cases. In case of corporation accounting year means the year 
ending on the day on which the books and accounts of the 
corporation are closed and balanced. In case of a company it 
means the period in respect of which any profit and loss account 
of the company laid before it in annual general meeting is made 
up, whether that period is a year or not. In any other case it means 
the year commencing on the 1st day of April, or if the accounts of 
an establishment maintained by the employer thereof are closed or 
balanced on any day other than the 31st day of March, then at the 
option of the employer, the year ending on the day on which the 
accounts are so closed and balanced. 
ALLOCABLE SURPLUS 
In case of a company other than a banking company allocable 
surplus means sixty-seven per cent of the available surplus in an 
accounting year of the company which has not made the 
arrangements prescribed under the Income-tax Act for the 


The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 199 
declaration and payment within India of the dividends payable 
out of its profits in accordance with the provisions of section 194 
of that Act. In all other cases allocable surplus in an accounting 
year. 
AVAILABLE SURPLUS 
Available surplus in any accounting year is computed under 
section 5 of the Act. The available surplus as provided by section 5 
of the Act in respect of any accounting year shall be the gross 
profit for that year after deducting therefrom those sums referred 
to in section 6 of the Act. Prior to the Payment of Bonus 
(Amendment) Act, 1969 one of the sums referred to in section 6 
was the tax which the employer was liable to pay for the 
accounting year in respect of his income, profits and gains during 
the year. 
The available surplus in respect of the accounting year 
commencing on any day in the year 1968 and in respect of every 
subsequent accounting year shall be the aggregate of (a) the gross 
profit for that accounting year after deducting those sums as 
referred to in section 6; and (b) an amount equal to the difference 
between (i) the direct tax, calculated in accordance with the 
provisions of section 7 in respect of an amount equal to the gross 
profits of the employer for the immediately preceding accounting 
year, and (ii) the direct tax calculated in the same manner but after 
deducting therefrom the amount of bonus which the employer has 
paid or is liable to pay to his employees in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act for that year. 
The following sums shall be deducted from the gross profits as 
prior charges:— 
(a) Any amount by way of depreciation admissible in 
accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax law. In 
case an employer has been paying bonus to his employees 
under a settlement or an award or an agreement made 
before the 29th May, 1965 and subsisting on that date 
after deducting from the gross profits notional normal 
depreciation, then the amount of depreciation to be 
deducted shall continue at the option of such employer to 
be such notional normal depreciation. But the employer 
must exercise this option once and within one year from 
that date. In all other cases amount of income-tax payable 


200 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) Labour Laws 
for bonus year is to be calculated after deducting statutory 
depreciation and not notional normal depreciation. A 
claim for depreciation on account of double or multiple 
shifts can be allowed even though such amount is not 
claimed under the Income-tax Act. 
Any amount by way of development rebate or investment 
allowance or development allowance which the employer 
is entitled to deduct from his income under the Income-tax 
Act. Amount actually allowable as development rebate 
under section 33 of the Incom-tax Act, 1961 should be 
allowed as deduction and not seventy per cent of that 
amount contemplated by section 34(3) of the Income-tax 
Act as development rebate reserve. Rehabilitation reserve 
is also a substantial item which goes to reduce the 
available surplus. But it is equitable in the larger interest 
of the industry as well as of the employees that proper 
rehabilitation reserve should be built up taking into 
consideration the increase in prices of plant and 
machinery which has to be replaced at a future date and 
by the determination of a multiplier and its divisor. 
Any direct tax which the employer is liable to pay for the 
accounting year in respect of his income, profits and 
gains during that year. This charge shall operate subject 
to the provisions of section 7 of the Act. The direct taxes 
are to be worked out on the gross profits worked out 
under section 4, less the prior charges under section 6, 
namely depreciation and development rebate but without 
deducting from such balance the bonus payable by the 
company in the particular accounting year. The 
amendment of the Act in 1969 has not altered this 
position. Further, in calculating the allocable surplus the 
tax concession by way of rebate that an employer will get 
under the Income-tax Act on the bonus found to be 
payable need not be taken into consideration. 
Such further sums as are specified in respect of the 
employer in the Third Schedule. In the Third Schedule to 
the Act employers have been classified into six categories, 
namely— (1) Company other than a Banking Company, 
(2) Banking Company, (3) Corporation, (4) Co-operative 
Society, (5) Any other employer not falling under any of 


The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 201 
the aforesaid categories, and (6) Any employer falling 
under item No. | or item No. 3 or item No. 4 or item No. 5 
and being a licensee within the meaning of the Electricity 
Supply Act, 1948. Each class of employer will be entitled 
to deduct further sums as provided in column 3 of the 
said Schedule. Where interest is paid by one office of the 
company to its another office on advances received from 
that office, it will be disallowed in calculating gross profit 
of the office even if such expenditure is accepted as a 
proper expenditure by auditors. 
Under clause l(iii) of the Third Schedule if the directors of a 
company once decide to declare a particular amount as dividend 
for the previous year and set apart the required amount from the 
General Reserve, it relates back to the date of the commencement of 
the accounting year. Hence the amount subsequently declared as 
dividend is deductible from Reserves though on the date of 
commencement of the year no dividend us declared. Strict 
interpretation of the expression “on the date of the commencement 
of the year” is not possible. 
ACCURACY OF BALANCE SHEET AND PROFIT AND LOSS 
ACCOUNT 
Section 226( 1) of the Companies Act provides that a company 
or a corporation need not prove the accuracy of the balance sheet 
and profit and loss account by affidavit or any other mode. 
However, the proviso to the said section enables the authority that 
in case there is any doubt, steps can be taken to find out the 
accuracy. Sub-section (2) enables a party challenging the 
correctness of such statement by applying for clarification by the 
management and the authority before whom the proceedings are 
pending and the company will be given an opportunity to give 
clarification. In one case the opposite party had not challenged the 
accuracy of a particular item but simply attached the statement in 
general terms pertaining to method of accounting nor did he move 
the authority for direction, the presumption of accuracy could not 
be rebutted by the authority. The burden to prove accuracy lies 
upon the party challenging the correctness. In another case, it has 
been held that in case of dispute about accuracy of the balance 
sheet and profit and loss account, the industrial tribunal has the 
powers and duty to enquire into the accuracy of balance sheet and 


202 Labour Laws 
profit and loss account but it cannot make any fishing enquiry. It 
has been further held that if the Company fails to produce the 
material for purpose of calculating available surplus, the tribunal 
has to make its own calculation. 
DEARNESS ALLOWANCE 
Dearness Allowance is included in the definition of ‘salary’ or 
‘wages’ under section 2(21) of the Payment of Bonus Act. 
BONUS ON COMMISSION 
Section 2(21) of the Payment of Bonus Act defines ‘salary’ or 
‘wages’. Its opening provision includes within it all 
remunerations (other than the remuneration in case of overtime 
work) capable of being expressed in terms of money, which 
would, if the terms of employment, express or implied, were 
fulfilled, be payable to an employee in respect of his employment 
and includes dearness allowance, yet in express terms, the 
definition does not include any commission payable to the 
employee vide clause (vii) of section 2(21) of the Act. 
FORFEITURE OF BONUS 
An employee who is dismissed from service on the grounds of 
fraud, riotous or violent behaviour at the premises of the 
establishment or for theft, misappropriation or sabotage of any 
property of the establishment as contained in section 9 of the 
Payment of Bonus Act shall not only be disqualified from 
receiving the bonus for the accounting year in which he was 
dismissed but also for the past years remained unpaid to him. 
WAGES FOR BONUS 
Salary or wages for payment of wages other than house rent 
allowance includes dearness allowance. 
Hereinbelow are clarifications with regard to components of 
wages or salary. 
TIME LIMIT FOR PAYMENT OF BONUS 
All amounts payable to an employee by way of bonus are to be 
paid in cash: 
(a) Where there is dispute regarding payment of bonus 
pending before an authority (under the I.D. Act) within 
one month from the date on which the award becomes 


The Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 203 
enforceable or settlement comes into operation, in respect 
of such dispute; and 
(b) in all other cases within 8 months from the close of the 
accounting year. 
WORKING DAYS AND BONUS 
As per the provisions of section 14 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 
‘working days’ include days not worked because of leave 
(disablement caused by accident arising out of and in the course 
of employment) and days involved in lay-offs under an agreement 
or as permitted by standing orders under the relevant laws 
relating to industrial disputes as applicable to the establishment. 
The reference to ‘working day’ appears in section 8 in the context 
of eligibility for bonus, where it is provided that such eligibility 
depends upon the employee having worked in the establishment 
for at least 30 working days (not necessarily continuous) in the 
year, as well in section 13 which refers to proportionate reduction 
of the minimum bonus when it is paid on the basis of Rs.100 per 
adult employee and Rs.60 per non-adult employee respectively, in 
which case such minimum bonus is proportionately reduced by 
reference to the number of days worked, as compared to the total 
number of working days in the year. While section 14 indicates 
the meaning of ‘days worked” as applicable to a particular 
employee, there is no definition of what constitute the total 
number of ‘working days’ in the accounting year. This should, 
therefore, be calculated under any normally acceptable meaning of 
this phrase which is appropriate to the facts and circumstances of 
each case. 


204 
Retaining Allowance paid to 
the workmen’ of _ seasonal 
establishment during off season. 
Managing Director, Chalthan 
Vibhag Sahakari Khand Udyog, 
Chalthan v. Govt. Labour Officer, 
1981 Lab IC 292. 
City Compensatory Allow- 
ance paid to the employee since 
it is attached to the post. 
S. Krishnamurthy v. Presiding 
Officer, Central Govt. Labour 
Court Madras, 1986 I LLJ 133 
(SC). 
Lay Off Compensation paid 
to the workmen during lay off. 
1. Mohan Kumar v. Dy. Labour 
Commissioner, 1991 (62) FLR 903. 
2. P.K. Mohan Kumar v. 
Deputy Labour Commissioner, 
1996 LLR 765 (Ker HC). HELD TO BE WAGES Labour Laws 
HELD NOT TO BE WAGES 
Adhoc Allowance, Family 
Allowance, House Rent 
Allowance, and Tiffin 
Allowance - Cannot be 
considered as Dearness 
Allowance. 
Scindia Steam Navigation 
Company Ltd. v. Scindia Employees’ 
Union, 1983 II LLN 63. 
Subsistence Allowance would 
not amount to remuneration or 
wages within the meaning of 
section 2(21) of the Act. 
Motor Industries Company Ltd. 
v. Popat Murlidhar Patil, 1997 | 
LLN 749:1997 (2) LL] 1206 (Bom 
HC). 
However, in one case, the 
Gujarat High Court has held that 
a suspended employee will not 
be disqualified for bonus. 
Project Manager, Oil and 
Natural Gas Commission v. Sham 
Kumar Sehgal, 1995 LLR 618 (Guj 
HC). 
Value 
Chappals 
T.C. Panuswamy v. Labour 
Court, Coimbatore, 1970 (2) LLJ 507. of Uniform and 
Commission payable to the 
Salesmen. 
All India Voltas & Volkart 
Employees Federation v. Voltas 
Ltd., 1973 Lab IC 645. 


Applicability 
Every factory, 
mine, oil field, 
plantation, port, 
railways, company, 
shop, 
establishment or 
educational 
institutions 
employing 10 or 
more persons 
Calculation 
wages 
Nomination 
To be obtained 
by employer 
after expiry of 
one year's 
service, in 
Form F 
Recovery of 
Gratuity 
To apply within 
30 days in 
Form! when not 
paid within 30 days Calculation PAYMENT OF 
GRATUITY 
ACT, 1972 > 
miN CHECK LIST 
Employee 
Allemployees 
irrespective of 
status or - On rendering of 5 
years’ service, 
salary * either termination, 
Piece-rated Seasonal resignation or employee employee Entitlement” retirement @15 days @ 7 days - On completion wages for wages for every of five years’ 
every completed year service except 
completed of service in case of year onan death or average of 3 disablement months’ 
Mode of > 
Payment 
Cash or, if so 
desired, by 
Bank Draft or 
Cheque Total Ceiling 
Rs.3,50,000 
Forfeiture of Gratuity 
*On termination of an 
employee for moral 
turpitude and riotous or 
disorderly behaviour Gratuity 
Can not be 
attached in 
execution of any 
decree * Wholly or partially for 
wilfully causing loss, 
destruction of property, etc ‘|? Qualifying period | Wages for 
Calculation 
@15 days’ wages 
for every 
completed year as 
if the month 
comprises of 26 
days at the last 
drawn wages 
‘Display of Notice ~ 
On conspicuous 
place at the main 
entrance in English 
language or the 
language 
understood by 
majority of 
employees of 
property, etc 
& 
Penalties 
*|mprisonment for 6 
months or fine upto 
Rs.10,000 for 
avoiding to make 
payment by making 
false statement or 
representation 
=Imprisonment not 
less than 3 months 
and upto one year 
with fine on default 
in complying with 
the provisions of Act 
or Rules. 
Mm / 


17. The Payment of Gratuity 
Act, 1972 Tact | a 
The Payment of Gratuity Act as enacted in 1972 applies to 
every shop or establishment within the meaning of any law for the 
time being in force in a State in which 10 or more persons are 
employed or were employed on any day of the preceding 12 
months. A shop or establishment to which this Act has become 
applicable shall continue to be governed by the Act 
notwithstanding the number of persons employed therein at any 
time after it has become applicable. 
The original Act covered those employees who were getting 
salary upto Rs. 1,000 and it was increased to Rs. 3,500 per month 
with effect from 31-12-1992. The total payment of gratuity was 
restricted to Rs. 50,000. By an amending Act 34 of 1994, effective 
from 24th May, 1994, the salary limit for eligibility of gratuity to an 
employee has been removed but total limit of amount of gratuity 
has been restricted to Rs. 1,00,000. Thereafter by an amendment 
Act 11 of 1998, effective from 26th September, 1997, the gratuity 
limit has been raised to Rs. 3,50,000. 
Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on termination of his 
employment after he has rendered continuous service for not less 
than five years—(a) On his superannuation, or (b) On his 
retirement, resignation, or (c) On his death or disablement due to 
accident or disease. 
An employer will be liable to pay gratuity to the legal heirs/ 
nominees of the deceased employee even if the employee had not 
206 


The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 207 
completed five years of service. For every completed year of service 
or part thereof in excess of six months the employer shall pay 
gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days’ wages based on 
the rate of wages last drawn by the employee concerned: 
Provided that in the case of a piece-rated employee, daily wages 
shall be computed on the average of the total wages received by 
him for a period of three months immediately preceding the 
termination of his employment, and, for this purpose, the wages 
paid for any overtime work shall not be taken into account: 
Provided further that in the case of an employee who is 
employed in a seasonal establishment and who is not so 
employed throughout the year, the employer shall pay the gratuity 
at the rate of seven days’ wages for each season. 
Explanation.—In the case of a monthly rated employee, the 
fifteen days’ wages shall be calculated by dividing the monthly 
rate of wages last drawn by him by twenty-six and multiplying 
the quotient by fifteen. 
The amount of gratuity payable to an employee shall not exceed 
fifty thousand rupees. 
For the purpose of computing the gratuity payable to an 
employee who is employed, after his disablement, on reduced 
wages, his wages for the period preceding his disablement, shall 
be taken to be the wages received by him during that period, and 
his wages for the period subsequent to his disablement shall be 
taken to be the wages as so reduced. 
For payment of gratuity, ‘wages’ means all emoluments which 
are earned by an employee while on duty or on leave in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of his employment and 
which are paid or are payable to him in cash and includes 
dearness allowance but does not include any bonus, commission, 
house rent allowance, overtime wages and any other allowance. 
ACTUALLY WORKED - MEANING OF 
In Explanation I to section 4 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, the 
legislature has used the words ‘actually employed’. If it was 
contemplated by Explanation I that it was sufficient that there 
should be a subsisting contract of employment, then it was not 
necessary for the legislature to have used the words ‘actually 
employed’. It is not permissible to attribute redundancy to the 


208 Labour Laws 
legislature to defeat the purpose of enacting the explanation. The 
expression ‘actually employed’, in Explanation I to section 2(c) 
must in the context in which it occurs mean ‘actually worked’. 
ATTACHMENT OF GRATUITY - PAYABLE TO LEGAL HEIRS 
If the gratuity is payable to the employee then it is not liable to 
attachment. But if the employee is dead, obviously the gratuity 
cannot be deemed to be payable to the employee. If the said 
gratuity becomes payable to the heirs of the employees the same 
becomes attachable but the employer is not legally bounded to pay 
the said gratuity to the legal heirs of the employee. 
‘AVERAGE MONTHLY WAGES’ - CALCULATION 
The expression ‘average of the monthly basic wages’ can only 
mean the wage earned by an employee during a month divided by 
the number of days for which he has worked and multiplied by 26 
days in order to arrive at the monthly wages for computation of 
gratuity payable under a scheme of gratuity framed by the 
employer. For instance, the calculation of gratuity for an employee 
having served for 20 years and drawing salary of Rs. 2,600 per 
month will be as under: 
e Rs. 2,600 per month last drawn salary 
¢ Rs. 100 per day x 15 days x 20 years of service. 
¢ Rs. 30,000 gratuity payable. 
CONTINUOUS SERVICE - MEANING OF 
The term ‘continuous service’ has been controversial ever since 
the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 has come into force. In one case, 
the Supreme Court has also interpreted the terms which has led to 
the amendment of the definition by the Amending Act 25 of 1984 
where by a separate section 2A definition of ‘continuous service’ 
was added. Again by an Amending Act 22 of 1987 the amendment 
was made in the definition. In order to determine as to what 
‘continuous service’ means it is imperative to reproduce the 
section 2A defining ‘continuous service’ which reads as under: 
(1) An employee shall be said to be in continuous service for 
a period if he has, for that period, been in uninterrupted 
service, including service which may be interrupted on 
account of sickness, accident, leave, absence from duty 
without leave not being absence in respect of which an 


(2) The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 209 
order treating the absence as break in service has been 
passed in accordance with the standing orders, rules or 
regulations governing the employees of the establishment, 
lay off, strike or a lock-out or cessation of work not due to 
any fault of the employee, whether such uninterrupted or 
interrupted service was rendered before or after the 
commencement of this Act. 
Where an employee not being an employee employed ina 
seasonal establishment is not in continuous service 
within the meaning of clause (1) for any period of one 
year or six months, he shall be deemed to be in 
continuous service under the employee— 
(a) for the said period of one year, if the employer during 
the period of twelve calendar months preceding the 
date with reference to which calculation is to be 
made, has actually worked under the employer for 
not less than— 
(i) one-hundred and ninety days, in the case of an 
employee employed below the ground in a mine 
or an establishment which works for less than six 
days in a week; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case. 
(b) for the said period of six months, if the employee 
during the period of six calendar months preceding 
the date with reference to which the calculation is to 
be made, has actually worked under the employer for 
not less than— . 
(i) ninety-five days, in the case of an employee 
employed below the ground in a mine or in an 
establishment which works for less than six days 
in a week; and 
(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of clause (2) the number of 
days on which an employee has actually worked under 
an employer shall include the days on which— 
(i) he has been laid off under an agreement or as 
permitted by standing orders made under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 


210 Labour Laws 
(20 of 1946) or under the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 or under any other law applicable to the 
establishment; 
(ii) he has been on leave with full wages, earned in the 
previous year; 
(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement 
caused by accident arising out of and in the course of 
his employment; and 
(iv) in the case of a female, she has been in maternity 
leave; however, that the total period of such maternity 
leave does not exceed twelve weeks. 
(3) Where. an employee employed in a_ seasonal 
establishment is not in continuous service within the 
meaning of clause (1) for any period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service 
under the employer for such period if he has actually 
worked for not less than seventy-five per cent of the 
number of days on which the establishment was in 
operation during such period. 
DUTY OF AN EMPLOYER TO PAY GRATUITY 
Section 4 of the Act casts an obligation on an employer of an 
establishment to which the Payment of Gratuity Act applies, to 
consider the case of each individual employee in the matter of 
payment of gratuity to him. This is a statutory duty or obligation 
cast on the employer by the Act and the factory, shop or 
establishment is thereunder bound to consider the case of an 
employee whether he is entitled to receive gratuity. The employer 
shall arrange to pay the amount of gratuity within thirty days 
from the date it becomes payable to the person to whom the 
gratuity is payable. If the amount of gratuity payable under 
section 4 is not paid by the employer within the period specified, 
the employer shall pay, from the date on which the gratuity 
becomes payable to the date on which it is paid, simple interest at 
such rate, not exceeding the rate notified by the Central 
Government from time to time for repayment of long term deposits, 
as that Government may, by notification specify. The rate of 
interest for delayed payment of gratuity has been fixed at 10% per 
annum by amendment by Act 22 of 1987. Be it made clear that the 
amount of interest payable by the employer shall in no case exceed 


The Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 211 
the amount of gratuity payable under the Act. However, no such 
interest shall be payable if the delay in the payment is due to the 
fault of the employee and the employer has obtained permission 
in writing from the controlling authority for the delayed payment 
on this ground. 
FORFEITURE OF GRATUITY 
The gratuity payable to an employee shall be wholly forfeited— 
(i) if the service of such employee has been terminated for his 
riotous or disorderly conduct or any other act of violence 
on his part; or 
(ii) if the services of such employee has been terminated for 
any act which constitutes an offence involving moral 
turpitude provided that such offence is committed by him 
in the course of his employment. In order to forfeit gratuity 
of an employee, there must be termination order 
containing the charges as established to the effect that the 
employee was guilty of any of the aforesaid misconducts. 
In one case, it has been held that in the absence of 
termination order containing any of the above allegations, 
the gratuity of an employee cannot be forfeited. 
TIME LIMIT FOR CLAIMING GRATUITY 
If an employer fails to pay gratuity to an employee or his legal 
heirs or the nominee, the Payment of Gratuity Act prescribes time 
limit of one year for claiming of gratuity and filing an appeal 
within 60 days from the receipt of the order, to the appellate 
authority when a person is aggrieved by the order of the 
controlling authority. Since the Gratuity Act is a beneficial 
legislation, it does not prohibit the authorities in condoning delay 
for making claim for gratuity whenever there is sufficient cause in 
not making the claim or filing of an appeal before the authorities. 
MODE FOR PAYMENT OF GRATUITY 
The mode for payment of gratuity is prescribed in section 9 of 
the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. The said section contemplates 
that gratuity payable under the Act should be paid in cash, or if so 
desired by the payee, by demand draft or bank cheque to the 
eligible employee, nominee or legal heir, as the case may be. The 
second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Act further 
lays down that in case of death of the employee, gratuity payable 


242 Labour Laws 
to him should be paid to his nominee, or if no nomination has 
been made, to his heirs. The use of word, ‘eligible’ before the 
expression, ‘employee, nominee or legal heir’ is also not without 
significance. In case of death, the gratuity amount payable 
under the Act has to be paid to the ‘eligible’ nominee or the 
guardian of such nominee and where no nomination has been 
made, to his heirs. A further obligation of the employer is to 
intimate the details of payment to the controlling authority of 
the area while making payment of the gratuity amount. Where, 
however, the eligible employee, his nominee, legal heir or the 
guardian of the nominee, as the case may be, so desires and the 
amount of gratuity payable is less than one thousand rupees 
payment may be made by postal money order after deducting 
the postal money order commission thereof from the amount 
payable. 
NOTICE OF OPENING, CHANGE OR CLOSURE OF AN 
ESTABLISHMENT 
An employer has to send a notice in Form A to the 
Controlling Authority of the area within 30 days of the Rules as 
becoming applicable. In addition to that, Form B is to be 
submitted within 30 days of any change in the name, address, 
employer or nature of business whereas an employer has to 
send Form C intending to close down the business atleast 60 
days before intended closure. 
NOMINATION 
Under rule 6, a nomination shall be in Form F and will be 
submitted in duplicate within one year from the employment of 
the employee. 
DISPLAY OF NOTICE 
There is statutory obligation under rule 4(1) to display a 
notice conspicuously at or near the main entrance of the 
establishment in bold letters in English and in language 
understood by the majority of the employees specifying the 
name of the officer with designation authorised to receive 
notices under the Act or the Rules. A fresh notice is required to 
be displayed as per rule 4(2) of the Rules immediately after the 
notice referred to in sub-rule (1) becomes illegible or requires a 
change. The displaying of abstract of the Act and Rules at a 
conspicuous place at or near the main entrance of the 
establishment by the employer has also been made obligatory, 
under rule 20 of the Payment of Gratuity (Central) Rules, 1972. 
The rule provides that the employer shall display an abstract of 
the Act and the Rules made thereunder as given in Form ‘U’ in 
English and in the language understood by the majority of the 
employees at a conspicuous place at or near the main entrance 
of the establishment. | 


PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936 
ESSE Object of the Act ea 
Applicability of the Act To regulate the payment of wages of certain Wages to be paid in * Factory * Industrial classes of employed persons. current coins or 
Establishment * Tramway currency notes 
service or motor transport 5 All wages shall be paid 
service engaged in in current coins or 
carrying passengers or Time of payment of wages currency notes or in both. 
goods or both by road for The wages of every person employed be paid * After obtaining the 
hire or reward * Air * When less than 1000 persons are employed, authorization, 
transport service * Dock, shall be paid before the expiry of the 7” day of either by cheque 
Wharf or Jetty * Inland the following month. or by crediting 
vessel, mechanically * When more than 1000 workers, the wages in 
propelled * Mine, quarry before the expiry of the 10" day employee’s bank 
or oil-field * Plantation of the following month. eS account. 
* Workshop or other Sec. 5 
establishment etc CHECKLIST 
Deduction made from wages 
Deductions such as, fine, deduction for amenities 
and services supplied by the employer, advances 
paid, over payment of wages, loan, granted for 
house-building or other purposes, income tax Deduction for absence 
from duties for 
unauthorised absence Coverage of Employees 
Drawing average wage upto 
Rs. 10,000 per month 
Absence for whole or any 
Fines as prescribed by payable, in pursuance of the order of the Court, PF part of the day - 
* Not to be imposed contributions, cooperative societies, premium for ° |f ten or more persons 
unless the employer is Life Insurance, contribution to any fund constituted absent without 
by employer or a trade union, recovery of losses, 
ESI contributions etc. reasonable cause, 
deduction of wages 
upto 8 days. given an opportunity to 
show cause 
To record in the 
register Sec. 8 Sec. 7 
Deduction for damages or loss 
Deductions for services * For default or negligence of an employee 
rendered resulting into loss. 
When accommodation * Show cause notice has, to be given to the d 
amenity or service has employee. Sec. 10 ZS 
been accepted by the 
employee Lr ge | > 
Sec. 11 > I | a PENALTIES (Sec. 20) 
Fine not less than Rs.1000 which may extend toe Rs.5000. 
On subsequent conviction fine not less than Rs.5000, may 
extend to Rs.10,000. On contravention of S.4, S.5(4), S.6, 
S.8(8), S.10(2) or S.25 fine not less than Rs.1000 - may 
extend to Rs.5000. On subsequent conviction fine not less 
than Rs.5000 - may extend to Rs.10,000. On contravention of S. 5 (except sub-sec.4), S.7, S.8 
(except sub-sec.8), S 9, S.10 (except sub-sec. 2) and 
Secs.11 to 13 
oo 
* For failing to maintain registers or records; or 
* Wilfully refusing or without lawful excuse neglecting 
to furnish information or return; or 
* Wilfully furnishing or causing to be furnished any 
information or return which he knows to be false; or 
* Refusing to answer or wilfully giving a false answer 
to any question necessary for obtaining any 
information required to be furnished under this Act * Fine which shall not be less than Rs.1000 but may 
extend to Rs.5000 - On record conviction fine not less 
than Rs.5000, may extend to Rs.10,000. 
* For second or subsequent conviction, fine not less than 
Rs.5000 but may extend to Rs.10,000. 
Wilfully obstructing an Inspector in the discharge of 
his duties under this Act; or 
* Refusing or wilfully neglecting to afford an Inspector 
any reasonable facility for making any entry, 
inspection etc 
* Wilfully refusing to produce on the demand of an 
Inspector any register or other document kept in 
pursuance of this Act; or preventing any person for 
appearance etc 
* On coriviction for any offence and again guilty of 
contravention of same provision 
« Failing or neglecting to pay wages to any employee Fine not less than Rs.1000 extendable 
upto Rs.5000 - On subsequent conviction fire 
not less than Rs.5000 - may extend to Rs.10,000 
* Imprisonment not less than one month extendable upto 
six months and fine not less than Rs.2000 extendable 
upto Rs.15000 
* Additional fine upto Rs.100 for each day ee 
_——————— 


18. The Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936 , 
For the working class there cannot be any injustice greater than 
that which deprives a worker of his or her wages due to him from 
his employer. Also, it causes more hardship and distress than 
delays in receiving the wages a person needs for day-to-day 
living. Therefore, the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 has a historical 
background. 
The Government found it necessary to regulate the payment of 
wage in industry because there were many abuses, payments 
denied or delayed, arbitrary deductions, heavy fines, and payment 
in kind instead of cash. 
OBJECT OF THE ACT 
The Payment of Wages Act regulates the payment of wages to 
certain classes of persons employed in industry and _ its 
importance cannot be under-estimated. The Act guarantees 
payment of wages on time and without any deductions except 
those authorised under the Act. The Act provides for the 
responsibility for payment of wages, fixation of wage period, time 
and mode of payment of wages, permissible deduction as also 
casts upon the employer a duty to seek the approval of the 
Government for the acts and permission for which fines may be 
imposed by him and also sealing of the fines, and also for a 
machinery to hear and decide complaints regarding the deduction 
from wages or in delay in payment of wages, penalty for malicious 
and vexatious claims. The Act does not apply to persons whose 
wage is Rs. 10,000 or more per month. The Act also provides to 
the effect that a worker cannot contract out of any right 
conferred upon him under the Act. 
214 


The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 215 
APPLICABILITY OF THE ACT 
The Act applies to Railways, factories, mines and following 
establishments:— 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
WAGES tramway or motor transport service engaged in carrying 
passengers or goods or both by road for hire or reward; 
dock, wharf or jetty; 
inland vessel, mechanically propelled; 
mine, quarry or oil-fields; 
plantation; 
workshop or other establishment in which articles are 
produced, adapted or manufactured with a view to their 
use, transport or sale; 
establishment in which any work relating to the 
construction, development or maintenance of building, 
road, bridges or canals or relating to operations connected 
with navigations, irrigation or other supply of water, or 
relating to the generation, transmission and distribution 
of electricity or any other form of power, is being carried 
on; 
any other establishment covered by Central/State 
Government through notification in Official Gazette. 
“Wages” means all remuneration (whether by way of salary, 
allowances or otherwise) expressed in terms of money and 
includes — 
(a) 
(b) any remuneration payable under any award or settlement 
between the parties; 
remuneration in respect of overtime, holiday, or any leave 
period; 
additional remuneration payable under terms of 
employment (whether called a bonus or by any other 
name); 
sum payable under any law by reason of termination of 
employment but not providing any time limit; 
sum under the scheme if any, but does not include — 
(i) any bonus (whether under a scheme of profit sharing 
or otherwise) which does not form part of the 
remuneration payable under term of employment or 
which is not payable under any award or settlement 
between the parties or orders of a court; 
(ii) value of house accommodation or of the supply of 
light, water, medical attendance or other amenity or of 


216 Labour Laws 
any service excluded from the computation of wages 
by a general or special order of the State Government; 
(iii) Provident Fund; 
(iv) travelling allowance or value of travelling concession; 
(v) special expenses on account of the nature of his 
employment; 
(vi) gratuity. 
TIMELY PAYMENT OF WAGES 
Wages must be paid— 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) before the expiry of the seventh day after the last day of 
the wage-period, if less than 1000 workmen are employed 
and in other case on the 10th day; 
in current coin or currency notes and by cheques or by 
crediting the wages in the employee’s bank account after 
obtaining his written authority; 
on a working day; 
before the expiry of the second day, to the person whose 
employment is terminated. 
No wage-period should exceed one month. 
RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF WAGES 
Every employer shall be responsible for the payment of all 
wages required to be paid under this Act to persons employed by 
him and in case of persons employed,— 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) in factories, if a person has been named as the manager of 
the factory under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 7 
of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948); 
in industrial or other establishments, if there is a person 
responsible to the employer for the supervision and 
control of the industrial or other establishment; 
upon railways (other than in factories), if the employer is 
the railway administration and_ the railway 
administration has nominated a person in this behalf for 
the local area concerned; 
in the case of contractor, a person designated by such 
contractor who is directly under his charge; and 


The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 217 
(e) in any other case, 
a person designated by the employer as a person responsible for 
complying with the provisions of the Act, the person so named, 
the person responsible to the employer, the person so nominated 
or the person so designated, as the case may be, shall be 
responsible for such payment. 
DEDUCTIONS FROM WAGES 
The following are the main deductions as allowed:— 
fines; 
deduction for the actual period of absence; 
deduction for damage or loss of goods expressly entrusted 
to the employed person for custody, or for loss of money 
for which he is required to account, where such damage 
or loss is directly attributed to his negligence or default; 
deduction for house-accommodation; 
deduction for amenities and services supplied by the 
employer as agreed by to between the employer and the 
employed person. However, the services do not include 
the supply of tools and raw materials required for the 
purposes of employment; 
deduction for recovery of advances and interest, and for 
adjustment of over-payment of wages; 
deduction for recovery of loans from any fund constituted 
for the welfare of labour as agreed to between the 
employer and the employed person; 
deduction for recovery of loans for house building or for 
other purposes as agreed to between employer and the 
employed person; 
deduction for income-tax; 
deduction on orders of a court or other authority; 
deduction for subscription and repayment of advance 
from any Provided Fund; 
deduction for payments to co-operative societies as agreed 
to between employer and the employed person; 
deduction of premium for LIC policy on written 
authorisation of the employed person, or for Post Office 
Savings Scheme; 


218 Labour Laws 
¢ deduction on written authorisation by the employee for 
contribution to any fund constituted by the employer or 
trade union for welfare of employed persons as agreed to 
between employer and the employed persons; 
¢ deduction on written authorisation of the employed 
person for payment of fees for membership of trade union 
as agreed to between employer and the employed person; 
¢ deduction made on written authorisation of the employed 
person, for contribution to Prime Minister’s National 
Relief Fund or for such other fund as the Central 
Government may notify in the Official Gazette. 
Total amount of deductions should not exceed 75% of wages of 
the employed person in any wage-period if whole or part of the 
deductions are meant for payments to co-operative societies. In 
other cases it should not exceed 50%. 
(For full details refer to section 7 of the Act). 
LEVY OF FINES 
Fines can be imposed only for acts and omissions the list of 
which has been approved by the appropriate Government. Fines 
should not exceed 3% of the wages in a month; be recovered 
within 90 days of the date of the act or omission; be imposed after 
a proper show cause procedure and cannot be imposed on an 
employed person of less than 15 years of age. 
DEDUCTION FOR DAMAGE AND LOSS 
If any employee causes damage or loss to the employer due to 
his negligence the employer may deduct such damage or loss after 
giving the employee an opportunity of showing cause. 
CLAIM 
Claims arising out of deduction from wages or delay in 
payment of wages and penalty for malicious claims will be heard 
and decided by the authority appointed by the appropriate 
Government for any specified area. 
Employees of the same unpaid group may file joint application 
for realisation of the dues and compensation. 
EMPLOYER’S OBLIGATIONS 
1. To fix the wage-period not exceeding one month 
(section 5). 


12. The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 219 
To pay wages in cash or by cheque after taking written 
authorisation of the employed person (section 6). 
To pay wages on any working day. 
To make deductions permissible only under section 7 
from the wages of the employed person. 
To ensure that deductions do not exceed 75% where 
payment to a co-operative society is to be made, and in 
other cases, deductions do not exceed 50%. 
To seek, before imposing fines, approval of list of acts and 
omissions from the prescribed authority. 
Not to impose fines exceeding 3% of the wages on the 
employee. 
To give show-cause notice to the employed person before 
imposing fines. 
To recover fines within 60 days of the date of offence. 
To afford facilities to Inspectors for entry, inspection, 
supervision, examination or inquiry under the Act. 
. To display abstract of the Act and the Rules in English 
and in a language understood by the majority of 
workmen. 
To maintain following registers in the prescribed forms:— 
(i) Register of wages; 
(ii) Register of fines; 
(iii) Register of deduction for damage or loss; 
(iv) Register of advances. 


220 LaLour Laws 
PENALTIES FOR CONTRAVENTION OF 
THE PROVISIONS OF THE ACT 
CONTRAVENTION/OFFENCE FINE & PUNISHMENT OR BOTH 
On contravention of S. 5 (except Fine not less than Rs. 1,000 which 
sub-sec. 4), S. 7, S. 8 (except sub- may extend to Rs. 5,000. On 
sec. 8), S. 9, S. 10 (except sub-sec. subsequent conviction fine not less 
2) and Secs. 11 to 13. than Rs. 5,000, may extend to Rs. 
10,000. On contravention S.4, 
S.5(4), S.6, S.8(8), S.10(2) or S.25 
fine not less than Rs. 1,000 - may 
extend to Rs.5000. On subsequent 
conviction fine not less than Rs. 
5,000 - may extend to Rs. 10,000. 
e Fine which shall not less than 
Rs. 1,000 but may extend to 
Rs. 5,000. On record conviction 
fine not less than Rs.5,000, 
may extend to Rs. 10,000. 
¢ For second or _ subsequent 
conviction, fine not less than 
Rs. 5,000 but may extend to For failing to maintain registers 
or records; or 
¢ Wilfully refusing or without 
lawful excuse neglecting to 
furnish information or return; or 
¢ Wilfully furnishing or causing to 
be furnished any information or 
return which he knows to be 
false; or Rs. 10,000. 
¢ Refusing to answer or wilfully 
giving a false answer to any 
question necessary for obtaining 
any information required to be 
furnished under this Act. 
Wilfully obstructimg an 
Inspector in the discharge of his 
duties under this Act; or 
° Refusing or wilfully neglecting 
to afford an Inspector any 
reasonable facility for making 
any entry, inspection etc. 
¢ Wilfully refusing to produce on 
the demand of an Inspector any 
register or other document kept 
in pursuance of this Act; or 
preventing any _ person for 
appearance, etc. Fine not less than Rs. 1,000 
extendable upto Rs. 5,000 - 
On subsequent conviction fine 
not less than Rs. 5,000 - may 
extend to Rs. 10,000. 
On conviction for any offence 
and again guilty of 
contravention of same 
provision. 
¢ Failing or neglecting to pay 
wages to any employee. Imprisonment not less than 
one month extendable upto six 
months and fine not less than 
Rs. 2,000 extendable upto Rs. 
15,000. 
¢ Additional fine upto Rs. 100 
for each day. Ce 
ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ay ee ee a 


SALES PROMOTION EMPLOYEES (CONDITIONS. _\, 7 
OF SERVICE) ACT, 1976 & THE RULES i CHECKLIST 
Applicability of the Act 
oe Whole of India with 
effect from 6-3-1976. 
Applicability of other Acts 
* Workmen’s Compensation 
Act, 1923 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 
Maintenance of register 
A register of sales 
promotion 
employees in 
Form B. 
Service Books for 
every employee in 
FormC. : 
A register of service books in 
Form D. 
Leave account of each 
employee in Form E. 
Sec. 7 Rule 23 
Wages for weekly day of rest 
* Entitled to wages on 
weekly days of 
rest as if he was 
on duty. 
Rule 7 
Affixing of holidays to leave 
Prefixing or suffixing of any leave 
not permissible. 
Rule 11 
Quarantine leave 
Upto 30 days on the 
recommendations of authorised 
medical attendant or Public 
Health Officer. 
Rule 16 Object of the Act 
To regulate certain conditions of service of sales promotion employees in certain establishments. 
Leave 
Earned leave and cash 
compensation on earned leave 
not availed of. 
On full wages for not less than 
1/11th of the period spent on duty. 
Leave on medical certificate 
On one-half of the wages for 
not less than 1/18th of the 
period of service. 
Cashable on voluntary 
relinquishment or termination 
other than by way of punishment. 
Sec. 4 
Number of holidays in a year 
10 ina calendar year. 
Rule 4 
Compensatory holidays 
Within 30 days of the day when he 
was required to work. 
Rule 5 
Application for leave 
When other than casual leave, not 
less than one month before 
commencement of leave except for 
urgent or unforeseen 
circumstances. 
Rule 9 
Holidays intervening during the 
period of leave 
Except casual leave granted or day 
of weekly rest, other holidays shall 
be part of leave. Rule 12 
Extraordinary leave 
At the discretion of the employer. 
Rule 17 
PENALTY ee Saee BRIA! 
je 
Maximum limit upto which 
earned leave 
* Can be accumulated 180 
days of which the employee 
can avail himself 90 days at 
a time. 
¢ Encashment of leave 120 
days. 
Rule 14 
Issue of Appointment Letter 
in FormA 
Within three months from the 
commencement of the Act and 
in other case on appointment. 
{cman Sec. 5 Rule 22 
Wages for holidays 
To be entitled for wages on all 
holidays as if he was on duty. 
Rule 6 
Recording of reason for 
refusal or postponement of 
Rule 10 
Medical leave 
On production of medical 
certificate. 
Rule 15 
Casual leave 
15 days in a calendar year. 
On contravention of provisions relating to ‘Leave’, Issue of 
Appointment Letter or Maintenance of Registers fine upto Rs.1000. 


19. The Sales Promotion 
Employees (Conditions 
of Service) Act, 1976 
ee ee ee ae 
THE OBJECT 
As a result of the Supreme Court judgment in the case of May 
and Baker (India) Limited v. Their Workmen, 1961 (2) LL] 94, the 
persons engaged in sales promotion did not come within the 
purview of the definition of “workman” under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 and as such they did not have any protection 
regarding security of employment and other benefits under that 
Act. These persons, particularly the medical representatives in the 
pharmaceutical industry have been demanding from time to time 
that they should be covered by Industrial Disputes Act. On a 
petition made by the Federation of Medical Representatives 
Associations of India, the Committee on Petitions (Rajya Sabha) in 
its thirteenth report submitted on March 14, 1972, came to the 
conclusion that “the ends of social justice to this class of people 
will not be met only by suitably amending the definition of the 
term “workman” in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, in a manner 
that the medical representatives are also covered by the definition 
of ‘workman’ in the said Act”. It was, therefore considered, more 
appropriate to have a separate legislation for governing the 
conditions of service of sales promotion employees instead of 
amending Industrial Disputes Act to bring such employees within 
222 


The Sales Promotion Employees 223 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 
its purview. The Act has been amended by Act No. 48 of 1986 as 
published in Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 1, 
dated 24-11-1986. 
The Act extends to whole of India and applies at the first 
instance to every establishment engaged in pharmaceutical 
industry. The Central Government may by notification in the 
Official Gazette apply the provisions of the Sales Promotion 
Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976, with effect from such 
date as may be specified in the notification to any other 
establishment engaged in any notified industry. 
IMPORTANT WORDS AND PHRASES UNDER THE ACT 
(a) “Sales promotion employees” mean any person by 
whatever name called (including an _ apprentice) 
employed or engaged in any establishment for hire or 
reward to do any work relating to promotion of sales or 
business or both, but does not include any such person— 
(i) who, being employed or engaged in a supervisory 
capacity, draws wages exceeding sixteen hundred 
rupees per mensem; or 
(ii) who is employed or engaged mainly in a managerial 
or administrative capacity. 
Explanation.—For the purpose of this clause, the wages per 
mensem of a person shall be deemed to be the amount equal to 
thirty times his total wages (whether or not including, or 
comprising only of commission) in respect of the continuous 
period of his service falling within the period of twelve months 
immediately preceding the date with reference to which the 
calculation is to be made, divided by the number of days 
comprising that period of service; 
(b) all words and expressions used but not defined in this 
Act, and defined in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(14 of 1947), shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in that Act. 
ISSUE OF APPOINTMENT LETTER 
Every employer in relation to a sales promotion employee shall 
furnish to such employee letter of appointment, in such form as 
may be prescribed— 


224 Labour Laws 
(a) in a case where he holds appointment as such at the 
commencement of this Act, within three months of such 
commencement; and 
(b) in any other case, on his appointment as such. 
MAINTENANCE OF REGISTER 
Every employer in relation to an establishment shall keep and 
maintain such registers and other documents and in such manner 
as may be prescribed. Rule 23 of the Sales Promotion Employees 
(Conditions of Service) Act provides that an establishment shall 
prepare and maintain following registers and records:— 
(a) A register of Sales Promotion Employees in Form B; 
(b) Service book for every employee in Form C; 
(c) A register of service book in Form D; 
(d) Leave account of each employee in Form E. 
PENALTY 
If any employer contravenes the provisions of section 4 
(pertaining to grant of leave) or section 5 (pertaining to issue of 
appointment letters) or section 7 (pertaining to maintenance of 
registers) or any rules made under the said Act, he shall be 
punishable to fine which may extend to one thousand rupees. 
OFFENCES BY COMPANIES 
(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was 
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company 
for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall 
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this 
section, if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company and it proved that the offence has been committed with 
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on eT ee 


The Sales Promotion Employees 225 
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 
the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, management, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of such offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
(3) For the purposes of this section— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 




CHECKLIST 
Object of the Act 
To provide for the registration of Trade Union and in certain respects 
to define the law relating to registered Trade Unions. 
Registration of trade union Application for registration 
Prescribed form with following details: * Any 7 or more members of a trade union may, by 
subscribing their names to the rules of the trade union and its compliance. * Names, occupations and addresses of 
* There should be at least 10%, or 100 of the workmen, whichever is the members’ place of work; 
less, engaged or employed in the establishment or industry with which it is 
connected. ¢ Address of its head office; and 
¢ Names, ages, addresses and 
occupaticns of its office bearers. * It has on the date of making application not less than L persons as its 
members, who are workmen engaged or employed in the establishment or 
industry with which it is connected. 
Sec. 4 
Minimum Cancellation of || Criminal conspiracy in trade 
requirements for registration disputes 
ip of tr membersh es trade ss Nf. No office-bearer or member of 
union * it the certificate has been g LK a registered trade union shall obtained by fraud or mistake or it = be liable to punishment under 
i h illfull : : Not less than 10%, or 100 of pe ES aieaooclon a ae “yee sub-section (2) of conspiracy 
the workmen, whichever is less, Act ae u/s 120B of IPC in respect of 
SP Se ee: any agreement made between the 
Ae nese ; nr members for the purpose of furthering engaged or employedin an * If it ceases to have the requisite any such object of the Trade Union 
establishment etc. number of members. Sac: 17 
Sec. 9A Sec. 10 
Disqualification of Returns 
office-bearers of Trade Union 
Annually to the Registrar, on or before such date as may 
if one has not attained the age of 18 years. be prescribed, a general statement, audited in the 
prescribed manner, of all receipts and expenditure of 
every registered Trade Union during the year ending on 
Not applicable when 5 years have elapsed. the 31st December. 
Sec.21-A Sec. 28 Conviction for an offence involving moral turpitude. 
For making false entry in or any Fine upto Rs.500. On continuing default, 
omission in general statement additional fault, Rs.5 for each week (not 
required for sending returns. exceeding Rs.50). 
For making false entry in the form. Fine upto Rs.500. 
Supplying false information Fine upto Rs.200. 
regarding Trade Union. 


20. The Trade Unions Act, 
1926 
mi 
The trade unions in India came into existence long before 
independence in 1926 when Trade Unions Act was passed. It 
provides that any seven persons can form a trade union and get it 
registered. The Act has granted immunity from criminal 
prosecution for any agreement furthering trade union objectives, 
and from civil suit for action which would induce workers to 
break contract of employment or otherwise interfere with trade, 
business or employment. 
Since trade unions had no legal protection before 1926, the 
purpose of the Trade Unions Act was to give the trade unions a 
legal status. Thus a registered trade union becomes a legal person 
and it can act or dispose of property and exist as a legal body 
distinct from the members of which the union is composed. 
The Constitution of free India also recognises the right of a 
citizen to form a union since the right to form and continue a trade 
union is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(c) of 
the Constitution of our country which can only be subjected to 
reasonable restriction in the public interest as provided by Article 
19(1)(6) of the Constitution. Provision is also made in the Indian 
Trade Unions Act, 1926, for providing them immunities from 
criminal prosecution in certain circumstances which further 
ensure the safe conduct of the trade unions. Under the various 
laws, the trade unions are required to get themselves registered for 
certain purposes. Every trade union is required to register itself 
under the Trade Unions Act in order to operate as a trade union. 
228 


The Trade Unions Act, 1926 229 
“Trade Union” means any combination, whether temporary or 
permanent, formed primarily for the purpose of regulating the 
relations between workmen and employers or between workmen 
and workmen, or between employers and employers, or for 
imposing restrictive conditions on the conduct of any trade or 
business, and includes any federation of two or more trade 
unions. 
IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS 
‘Appropriate Government’ means, in relation to Trade Unions 
whose objects are not confined to one State, the Central 
Government, and in relation to other Trade Unions, the State 
Government, and unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context. 
‘office bearer’ means in the case of a Trade Union, which is 
registered under this Act as the Head Office thereof. 
‘Registered Office’ means that office of a Trade Union, which 
is registered under this Act as the Head Office thereof. 
‘registered trade union’ means a Trade Union registered 
under this Act. 
‘registrar’ means (i) a Registrar of Trade Unions appointed by 
the appropriate Government under section 3 and includes 
any Additional or Deputy Registrar of Trade Unions, and (ii) 
in relation to any Trade Union, the Registrar appointed for the 
State in which the head or registered office, as the case may be, 
of Trade Union is situated. 
‘trade dispute’ means any dispute between employers and 
workmen or between workmen and workmen, or between 
employers and employers, which is connected with the 
employment or non-employment, or the terms of employment, 
or the conditions of labour, of any person. 
‘workmen’ means all persons employed in trade or industry 
whether or not in the employment of the employer with whom 
the trade dispute arises. 
REGISTRATION OF A TRADE UNION 
(1) Any seven or more members of a Trade Union may, by 
subscribing their names to the rules of the Trade Union 
and by otherwise complying with the provisions of this 


230 ‘Labour Laws 
Act with respect to registration, apply for registration of 
the Trade Union under this Act. 
Where an application has been made under sub-section 
(1) for the registration of a Trade Union, such application 
shall not be deemed to have become invalid merely by 
reason of the fact that, at any time after the date of the 
application, but before the registration of the Trade Union, 
some of the applicants, but not exceeding half of the total 
number of persons who made the application, have 
ceased to be members of the Trade Union or have given 
notice in writing to the Registrar dis-associating 
themselves from the application. 
Be it made clear that even after its registration there is no 
provision of recognition of trade union. Thus recognition of a 
trade union is, by and large, a matter of agreement between the 
employer and the trade union except in the State of Madhya 
Pradesh and Maharashtra where there is a separate legislation in 
this context. However, in public undertakings, recognition to trade 
unions is accorded under the ‘Code of Discipline in Industries’ 
but that too is by mutual agreement since the Code of Discipline in 
Industries has no legal force. 
APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION 
(1) 
(2) Every application for registration of a Trade Union shall 
be made to the Registrar, and shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the rules of the Trade Union and a statement of 
the following particulars, namely:— 
(a) the names, occupations and addresses of members 
making the application; 
(b) the name of the Trade Union and the address of its 
head office; and 
(c) the titles, names, ages, addresses and occupations of 
the office bearers of the Trade Union. 
Where a Trade Union has been in existence for more than 
one year before the making of an application for its 
registration, there shall be delivered to the Registrar, 
together with the application, a general statement of the 
assets and liabilities of the Trade Union prepared in such 
form and containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed. 


The Trade Unions Act, 1926 231 
PROVISIONS TO BE CONTAINED IN THE RULES OF A TRADE 
UNION 
A Trade Union shall not be entitled to registration under this 
Act, unless the executive thereof is constituted in accordance with 
the provisions of the Trade Unions Act, the rules thereof provide 
for the following matters, namely :— 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(ee) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) the name of the Trade Union; 
the whole of the objects for which the Trade Union has 
been established; 
the whole of the purposes for which the general funds of 
the Trade Union shall be applicable, all of which 
purposes shall be purposes to which such funds are 
lawfully applicable under this Act; 
the maintenance of a list of the members of the Trade 
Union and adequate facilities for the inspection thereof by 
the office bearers and members of the Trade Union; 
the admissions of ordinary members who shall be 
persons actually engaged or employed in an industry 
with which the Trade Union is connected and also the 
admission of the number of honorary or temporary 
members as office bearers required under section 22 to 
form the executive of the Trade Union; 
the payment of a subscription by members of the Trade 
Union which shall not be less than twenty-five paise per 
month per member; 
the conditions under which any member shall be entitled 
to any benefit assured by the rules and under which any 
fine or forfeiture may be imposed on the members; 
the manner in which the rules shall be amended, varied 
or rescinded; 
the manner in which the members of the executive and the 
other office bearers of the Trade Union shall be appointed 
and removed; 
the safe custody of the funds of the Trade Union, and 
annual audit in such a manner as may be prescribed, of 
the accounts thereof, and adequate facilities for the 
inspection of the account books by the office bearers and 
members of the Trade Union; and 


232 Labour Laws 
(j) the manner in which the Trade Union may be dissolved. 
REGISTRATION AND ITS CERTIFICATE 
The Registrar, on being satisfied that the Trade Union has 
complied with all the requirements of the Act, in regard to 
registration shall register the Trade Union by entering in a register 
to be maintained in such form as may be prescribed, the 
particulars relating to the Trade Union contained in the statement 
accompanying the application for registration. The Registrar, on 
registering a Trade Union under section 8, shall issue a certificate 
of registration in the prescribed form which shall be conclusive 
evidence that the Trade Union has been duly registered under this 
Act. 
CANCELLATION OF REGISTRATION 
A certificate of registration of a Trade Union may be withdrawn 
or cancelled by the Registrar — 
(a) on the application of the Trade Union to be verified in 
such manner as may be prescribed, or 
(b) if the Registrar is satisfied that the certificate has been 
obtained by fraud or mistake, or that the Trade Union has 
ceased to exist or has wilfully and after notice from the 
Registrar contravened any provision of this Act or 
allowed any rule to continue in force which is 
inconsistent with any such provision; or has rescinded 
any rule providing for any matter, provision for which is 
required by section 6: 
Provided that not less than two months’ previous notice in 
writing specifying the ground on which it is proposed to 
withdraw or cancel the certificate shall be given by the Registrar to 
the Trade Union before the certificate is withdrawn or cancelled 
otherwise than on the application of the Trade Union. 
REGISTERED OFFICE 
All communications and notices to a registered Trade Union 
may be addressed to its registered office. Notice of any change in 
the address of the head office shall be given within fourteen days 
of such change to the Registrar in writing, and the changed 
address shall be recorded in the register referred to in section 8. 


The Trade Unions Act, 1926 233 
CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY IN TRADE DISPUTES 
No office bearer or member of a registered Trade Union shall be 
liable to punishment under sub-section (2) of section /20B of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), in respect of any agreement made 
between the members for the purpose of furthering any such object 
of the Trade Union as is specified in section 15 of the Trade 
Unions Act unless the agreement is an agreement to commit an 
offence. 
IMMUNITY FROM CIVIL SUIT IN CERTAIN CASES 
No suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintainable in any 
Civil Court against any registered Trade Union or any office 
bearer or any member thereof in respect of any act done in 
contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute to which any 
member of the Trade Union is a party on the ground only that 
such act induces some other person to break a contract of 
employment, or that it is in interference with the trade, business or 
employment of some other person or with the right of some other 
person to dispose of his capital or of his labour as he wills. 
RETURNS 
(1) There shall be sent annually to the Registrar on or before 
such date as may be prescribed, a general statement 
audited in the prescribed manner, of all receipts and 
expenditures of every registered Trade Union during the 
year ending on the 31st day of December next preceding 
such prescribed date and of the assets and liabilities of 
the Trade Union existing on such 31st day of December. 
The statement shall be prepared in such form and shall 
comprise such particulars as may be prescribed. 
(2) Together with the general statement there shall be sent to 
the Registrar a statement showing all changes of office 
bearers made by the Trade Union during the year to 
which the general statement refers, together with a copy of 
the rules of the Trade Union corrected up to the date of the 
despatch thereof. 
(3) A copy of every alteration made in the rules of a registered 
Trade Union shall be sent to the Registrar within fifteen 
days of the making of the alteration. 


234 
(4) Labour Laws 
For the purpose of examining the documents referred to in 
sub-sections (1), (2) and (3), the Registrar or any officer 
authorised by him, by general or special order, may at all 
reasonable times inspect the certificate of registration, 
account books, registers, and other documents, relating to 
a Trade Union at its registered office or may require their 
production at such place as he may specify in this behalf, 
but no such place shall be at a distance of more than ten 
miles from the registered office of a Trade Union. 
FAILURE TO SUBMIT RETURNS 
(1) 
(2) If default is made on the part of any registered Trade 
Union in giving any notice or sending any statement or 
other document as required by or under any provision of 
this Act, every office bearer or other person bound by the 
rules of the Trade Union to give or send the same, or, if 
there is no such office bearer or person, every member of 
the executive of the Trade Union, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five rupees and, in the case 
of a continuing default, with an additional fine which 
may extend to five rupees for each week after the first 
during which the default continues: 
Provided that the aggregate fine shall not exceed fifty 
rupees. 
Any person who wilfully makes, or causes to be made, 
any false entry in, or any omission from, the general 
statement required by section 28 pertaining to ‘Returns’ or 
in or from any copy of rules or of alterations of rules sent 
to the Registrar under that section, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees. 
SUPPLYING FALSE INFORMATION REGARDING TRADE UNIONS 
Any person who with intent to deceive, gives to any member of 
a registered Trade Union or to any person intending or applying 
to become a member of such Trade Union any document 
purporting to be a copy of the rules of the Trade Union or of any 
alterations to the same which he knows, or has reason to believe is 
not a correct copy of such rules or alterations as are for the time 
being in force or any person who, with like intent gives a copy of 
any rules of an unregistered Trade Union to any person on the 


The Trade Unions Act, 1926 235 
pretence that such rules are the rules of a registered Trade Union, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred 
rupees. 
COGNIZANCE OF OFFENCES 
(1) No court inferior to that of a Presidency Magistrate or a 
Magistrate of the first class shall try an offence under this 
Act. 
No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this 
Act, unless complaint thereof has been made by, or with 
the previous sanction of, the Registrar or, in the case of an 
offence under section 32, pertaining to supplying false 
information regarding Trade Unions, by the person to 
whom the copy was given, within six months of the date 
on which the offence is alleged to have been committed. 
PRESCRIBED FORM A FOR APPLICATION FOR REGISTRATION OF 
TRADE UNION 
|B = 2.3 9 | | eae te Pe GAY Ob Stare 745 Ree 
1. We hereby apply for the registration of a Trade Union 
under the name of 
. The address of the head office of the Union is .......... 
. The Union came into existence on the........ day @f..;...20.. 
. The Union is a Union of employees (workers engaged in 
the industry or profession). 
. The particulars required by section 5(1)(c) of the Indian 
Trade Unions Act, 1926. 
. The particulars given in Schedule II show the provision 
made in the rules for the matters detailed in section 6 of 
the Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926. 
(To be struck out in the case of Unions which have not 
been in existence for one year before the date of 
application) The particulars required by section 5(2) of the 
Indian Trade Unions Act, 1926, are given in Schedule III. 


236 Labour Laws 
8. We have been duly authorised to make the application. 
Signature Occupation Address 
NGS O8§1 £ GW NO 
To the Registrar of Central Trade Unions. 
SCHEDULE I 
LIST OF OFFICERS 
Title Name Age Address Occupation 
Note: Enter in this Schedule the names of all members of the 
executive of the Union showing in Column I the names of any posts 
held by them (e.g., President, Secretary, Treasurer, etc.) in addition to 
their offices as members of the executive. 


WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION 
ACT, 1923 : CHECKLIST 
Employer’s liability to pay 
compensation to a workman 
On death or personal injury resulting 
into total or partial disablement or 
occupational disease caused toa 
workman arising out of and during the 
course of employment. Coverage of Workmen 
All workers irrespective of their status or 
salaries either directly or through 
contractor or a person recruited to work 
abroad. Applicability 
All over India 
Sec.1 
Sec.1(3) 
Sec.3 Amount of compensation 
* Where death of a workman results from the injury 
* an amount equal to fifty per cent of the monthly a. 
wages of the deceased workman'multiplied by /'t 
the relevant factor or an amount of eighty 
thousand rupees, whichever is more. 
* Where permanent total disablement results from the injury. 
* an amount equal to sixty per cent of the monthly wages of 
the injured workman multiplied by the relevant factor or an 
amount of ninety thousand rupees, whichever is more. 
Procedure for calculation 
Higher the age - Lower the compensation 
* Relevant factor specified in second column of 
Schedule !V giving slabs depending upon the 
age of the concerned workman. 
* Example : In case of death 
* Wages Rs.3000 PM »* Age 23 years 
* Factor as schedule IV Rs.219.95 
* Amount of compensation Rs.329935 
* In case of total disablement Rs.395910 When an employee is not 
liable for compensation 
¢ In respect of any injury which does 
result in the total or partial 
disablement of the workman fora 
period exceeding three days. 
* In respect of any injury, not resulting 
in death or permanent total 
disablement caused by an accident 
which is directly attributable to— 
¢ The workman having 
been at the time 
thereof under the 
influence of drink or 
“i drugs, or 
* Wilful disobedience of the 
workman to an order expressly 
given, or to a rule expressly 
framed, for the purpose of 
securing the safety of workmen, or 
¢ Wilful removal or disregard by the 
workman of any safety guard or 
other device which he knew to 
have been provided for the 
purpose of securing the safety of 
workman. Notice of 
accident Wages 
When the monthly wages 
are more than Rs.4000 per 
month it will be deemed 
Rs.4000. 
Sec.4 Exh.b As soon as 
practicable 
Sec.10 Sec. 3(a) & (b) 
Report of accident Bar upon contracting out 
Rule 11 Form EE 
Any workman relinquishing his 
Report of fatal accident and serious injury within right for personal injury 
7 days to the Commissioner (not applicable when 
ES! Act applies). 
cs 108 Sec.10 not permissible. 
Sec.14 
PENALTY 
* Incase of default by employer * 50% of the compensation amount + interest to be paid to the workman 
or his dependents as the case may be. < é 
* Deposit of Compensation * Within one month with the Compensation Commissioner. 
Sec.4A 3 E 


21. The Workmen's _ 
Compensation Act, 1923 a 
THE OBJECT 
This Act provides compensation to certain classes of workmen 
by their employers for injury which may be suffered by the 
workmen as a result of an accident during the~course of 
employment. The general principle is that a workman who suffers 
injury in course of his employment should be entitled to 
compensation and in case of a fatal injury his dependents should 
be compensated. The Act provides security to the workmen who 
receive partial incapacity resulting in a loss in the earning 
capacity. The compensation becomes payable under the Act not 
because of a tort or wrong doing by the employer. The liability 
under the Act has no connection with any wrong doing on the 
part of the employer. A workman means any person who is 
employed otherwise than for the purpose of employer’s trade or 
business and is employed in any such capacity as is specified in 
Schedule II. Also a person recruited for work abroad by a 
company will also be covered by this Act. The rate of 
compensation is provided in the Schedule IV appended to the Act. 
IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS AND CLARIFICATIONS 
“Compensation” means compensation as provided by this Act. 
“Dependent” means any of the following relatives of a 
deceased workman, namely:— 
238 


The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 239 
(i) a widow, a minor legitimate or adopted son, an 
unmarried legitimate or adopted daughter or a widowed 
mother; and 
(ii) if wholly dependent on the earnings of the workman at 
the time of his death, a son or a daughter who has 
attained the age of 18 years and who is infirm; 
(iii) if wholly or in part dependent on the earnings of the 
workman at the time of his death; 
(a) a widower; 
(b) a parent other than a widowed mother; 
(c) a minor illegitimate son, an unmarried illegitimate 
daughter or a daughter legitimate or illegitimate or 
adopted if married and a minor or if widowed and a 
minor; 
(d) a minor brother or an unmarried sister or a widowed 
sister if a minor; 
(e) a widowed daughter-in-law; 
(f) a minor child of a pre-deceased son; 
(g) a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter where no 
parent of the child is alive; or 
(h) a paternal grandparent if no parent of the workman is 
alive. 
Explanation.—’ For the purposes of sub-clause (ii) and items (f) 
and (g) of sub-clause (iii), references to a son, daughter or child 
include an adopted son, daughter or child respectively. 
“Employer” includes a body of persons whether incorporated 
or not and any managing agent of an employer and the legal 
representative of a deceased employer, and when the services of a 
workman are temporarily lent on hire to another person by the 
person with whom the workman has entered into a contract of 
service of apprenticeship, means such other person while the 
workman is working for him. 
“Managing Agent” means any person appointed or acting as 
the representative of another person for the purpose of carrying on 
such other person’s trade or business, but does not include an 
individual manager subordinate to an employer. 


240 Labour Laws 
“Partial disablement” means where the disablement is of a 
temporary nature, such disablement as reduces the earning 
capacity of a workman in any employment in which he was 
engaged at the time of the accident resulting in the disablement, 
and, where the disablement is of a permanent nature, such 
disablement as reduces his earning capacity in every employment 
which he was capable of undertaking at that time : 
Provided that every injury specified in Part II of Schedule I shall 
be deemed to result in permanent partial disablement. 
“Qualified Medical Practitioner” means any person registered 
under any Central Act, or an Act of the Legislature of a State 
providing for the maintenance of a register of a medical 
practitioner, or, any area where no such last mentioned Act is in 
force, any person declared by the State Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, to be a Qualified Medical 
Practitioner for the purposes of this Act. 
“Seaman” means any person forming any part of the crew of 
any ship, but does not include the master of the ship. 
“Total Disablement” means such disablement, whether of a 
temporary or permanent nature, as incapacitates a workman for 
all work which he was capable of performing at the time of the 
accident resulting in such disablement: 
Provided that permanent total disablement shall be deemed to 
result from every injury specified in Part I of Schedule I or from 
any combination of injuries specified in Part II thereof where the 
aggregate percentage of the loss of earning capacity, as specified 
in the said Part II against those injuries amount to one hundred 
per cent, or more. 
“Wages” includes any privilege or benefit which is capable of 
being estimated in money, other than a travelling allowance or the 
value of any travelling concession or a contribution paid by the 
employer to a workman towards any pension or provident fund or 
a sum paid to a workman to cover any special expenses entailed 
on him by the nature of his employment. 
“Workman” means any person who is— 
(i) a railway servant as defined in clause (34) of section 2 of 
the Railways Act, 1989, not permanently employed in any 
administrative, district or sub-divisional office of a ———— lO eee 
hn <= Oe 
ee eS a ee ee ee eT eee ee 
a eee ee 


(iA) 
(ii) The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 241 
Railway and not employed in any such capacity as 
specified in Schedule II, or 
(a) a master, seaman or other member of the crew of a 
ship, 
(b) a captain or other member of the crew of an aircraft, 
(c) a person recruited as driver, helper, mechanic, cleaner 
or in any other capacity in connection with a motor 
vehicle, 
(d) a person recruited for work abroad by a company, 
and who is employed outside India in any such capacity 
as is specified in Schedule II and the ship, aircraft or 
motor vehicle, or company, as the case may be is 
registered in India, or; 
employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule 
II, whether the contract of employment was made before 
or after the passing of this Act and whether such contract 
is expressed or implied, oral or in writing; but does not 
include any person working in the capacity of a member 
of the Armed Forces of the Union, 
and any reference to a workman who has been injured shall, 
where the workman is dead, include a reference to his dependents 
or any of them. 
LIABILITY OF AN EMPLOYER FOR COMPENSATION 
(1) If personal injury is caused to a workman by accident 
arising out of and in the course of his employment, his employer 
shall be liable to pay compensation in accordance with the 
provisions of Chapter II of the Act: 
Provided that the employer shall not be so liable— 
(a) 
(b) in respect of any injury which does not result in the total 
or partial disablement of the workman for a period 
exceeding a period of three days; 
in respect of any injury, not resulting in death or 
permanent total disablement caused by an accident 
which is directly attributable to— 
(i) the workman having been at the time thereof under 
the influence of drink or drugs; or 


242 Labour Laws 
(ii) the wilful disobedience of the workman to an order 
expressly given, or to a rule expressly framed, for the 
purpose of securing the safety of workmen; or 
(iii) the wilful removal or disregard by the workman of 
any safety guard or other device which he knew to 
have been provided for the purpose of securing the 
safety of workmen. 
(2) Ifa workman employed in any employment specified in Part 
A of Schedule III contracts any disease specified therein as an 
occupational disease peculiar to that employment, or if a 
workman, whilst in the service of an employer in whose service he 
has been employed for a continuous period of not less than six 
months (which period shall not include a period of service under 
any other employer in the same kind of employment) in any 
employment specified in Part B of Schedule III, contracts any 
disease specified therein as an occupational disease peculiar to 
that employment, or if a workman whilst in the service of one or 
more employers in any employment specified in Part C of 
Schedule III] for such continuous period as the Central 
Government may specify in respect of each such employment, 
contracts any disease specified therein as an occupational disease 
peculiar to that employment, the contracting of the disease shall 
be deemed to be an injury by accident within the meaning of this 
section, and unless the contrary is proved the accident shall be 
deemed to have arisen out of and in the course of the employment: 
Provided that if it is proved— 
(a) that a workman whilst in the service of one or more 
employers in any employment specified in Part C of 
Schedule III has contracted a disease specified therein as 
an occupational disease peculiar to that employment 
during a continuous period which is less than the period 
specified under this sub-section for that employment, and 
(b) that the disease has arisen out of and in the course of the 
employment, 
the contracting of such disease shall be deemed to be an injury by 
accident within the meaning of this section: 
Provided further that if it is proved that a workman who 
having served under any employer in any employment specified 
in Part B of Schedule III or who having served under one or more | 


The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 243 
employers in any employment specified in Part C of that Schedule, 
for a continuous period specified under this sub-section for that 
employment and he has after cessation of such service contracted 
any disease specified in the said Part B or the said Part C, as the 
case may be, as an occupational disease peculiar to the 
employment and that such disease arose out of the employment 
the contracting of the disease shall be deemed to be an injury by 
accident within the meaning of this section. 
(2A) If a workman employed in any employment specified in 
Part C of Schedule III contracts any occupational disease peculiar 
to that employment, the contracting whereof is deemed to be an 
injury by accident within the meaning of this section, and such 
employment was under more than one employer, such employers, 
shall be liable for the payment of the compensation in such 
proportion as the Commissioner may, in the circumstances, deem 
just. 
(3) The Central Government or the State Government, after 
giving, by notification in the Official Gazette, not less than three 
months’ notice of its intention so to do may, by a like notification, 
and any description of employment to the employments specified 
in Schedule IIL, and shall specify in the case of employments so 
added the diseases which shall be deemed for the purposes of this 
section to be occupational disease peculiar to those employments 
respectively and thereupon the provisions of sub-section (2) shall 
apply in the case of a notification by the Central Government, 
within the territories to which this Act extends, or in case of a 
notification by the State Government, within the State as if such 
diseases had been declared by this Act to be occupational diseases 
peculiar to those employments. 
(4) Save as provided by sub-sections (2), (2A) and (3), no 
compensation shall be payable to workman in respect of any 
disease unless the disease is directly attributed to a specific injury 
by accident arising out of and in the course of this employment. 
(5) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to confer any 
right to compensation on a workman in respect of any injury if he 
has instituted in a Civil Court a suit for damages in respect of the 
injury against the employer or any other person; and no suit for 
damages shall be maintainable by a workman in any court of law 
in respect of any injury— 


244 Labour Laws 
(a) if he has instituted a claim to compensation in respect of 
the injury before a Commissioner; or 
(b) if an agreement has been made between the workman and 
his employer providing for the payment of compensation 
in respect of the injury in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act. 
AMOUNT OF COMPENSATION AND METHOD OF CALCULATION 
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of 
compensation shall be as follows, namely:— 
(a) Where death results 
from the injury 
(b) Where permanent 
total disablement 
results from the injury an amount equal to fifty per cent 
of the monthly wages of the 
deceased workman multiplied 
by the relevant factor; or an 
amount of eighty thousand 
rupees, whichever is more; 
an amount equal to sixty per 
cent of the monthly wages of 
the injured workman multiplied 
by the relevant factor; or an 
amount of ninety thousand 
rupees, whichever is more. 
Explanation I.—For the purposes of clause (a) and clause (b), 
“relevant factor” in relation to a workman means the factor 
specified in the second column of Schedule IV against the entry in 
the first column of that Schedule specifying the number of years 
which are the same as the completed years of. the age of the 
workman on his last birthday immediately preceding the date on 
which the compensation fell due. 
Explanation II.—Where the monthly wages of a workman 
exceed four thousand rupees, his monthly wages for the purposes 
of clause (a) and clause (b) shall be deemed to be four thousand 
rupees only; 
-(c) Where permanent 
partial disablement 
results from the injury (i) in the case of an injury specified 
in Part Il of Schedule I, such 
percentage of the compensation 
which would have been payable 
in the case of permanent total ;* ein EG ae oe 


The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 245 
disablement as is _ specified 
therein as being the percentage 
of the loss of earning capacity 
caused by that injury, and 
(ii) in the case of an injury not 
specified in Schedule I, such 
percentage of the compensation 
payable in the case of per- 
manant total disablement as is 
proportionate to the loss of 
earning capacity (as assessed by 
the qualified medical 
practitioner) permanently 
caused by the injury. 
Explanation I—Where more injuries than one are caused by the 
same accident, the amount of compensation payable under this 
head shall be aggregated but not so in any case as to exceed the 
amount which would have been payable if permanent total 
disablement had resulted from the injuries. 
Explanation II.—In assessing the loss of earning capacity for the 
purposes of sub-clause (ii), the qualified medical practitioner shall 
have due regard to the percentages of loss of earning capacity in 
relation to different injuries specified in Schedule I; 
(d) Where temporary a half-monthly payment of the 
disablement, whether sum equivalent to twenty-five 
total or partial results per cent of monthly wages of the 
from the injury workman, to be paid in 
accordance with the provisions 
of sub-section (2). 
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
while fixing the amount of compensation payable to a workman 
in respect of an accident occurred outside India, the 
Commissioner shall take into account the amount of 
compensation, if any, awarded to such workman in accordance 
with the law of the country in which the accident occurred and 
shall reduce the amount fixed by him by the amount of 
compensation awarded to the workman in accordance with the 
law of that country. 


246 Labour Laws 
(2) The half-monthly payment referred to in clause (d) of sub- 
section (1) shall be payable on the sixteenth day— 
(i) from the date of disablement where such disablement 
lasts for a period of twenty-eight days or more; or 
(ii) after the expiry of a waiting period of three days from the 
date of disablement where such disablement lasts for a 
period of less than twenty-eight days; and thereafter half- 
monthly during the disablement or during a period of five 
years, whichever period is shorter : 
Provided that— 
(a) there shall be deducted from any lump sum or half- 
monthly payments to which the workman is entitled the 
amount of any payment or allowance which the workman 
has received from the employer by way of compensation 
during the period of disablement prior to the receipt of 
such lump sum or of the first half-monthly payment, as 
the case may be; and 
(b) no half-monthly payment shall in any case exceed the 
amount, if any, by which half the amount of the monthly 
wages of the workman before the accident exceeds half 
the amount of such wages which he is earning after the 
accident. 
Explanation I—Any payment or allowance which the workman 
has received from the employer towards his medical treatment 
shall not be deemed to be a payment or allowance received by him 
by way of compensation within the meaning of clause (a) of the 
proviso. 
(3) On the ceasing of the disablement before the date on which 
any half-monthly payment falls due there shall be payable in 
respect of that half-month a sum proportionate to the duration of 
the disablement in that half-month. 
(4) If the injury of the workman results in his death, the 
employer shall, in addition to the compensation under sub-section 
(1) deposit with the Commissioner a sum of two thousand five 
hundred rupees for payment of the same to the eldest surviving 
defendant of the workman towards the expenditure of the funeral 
of such workman or where the workman did not have a 
dependent or was not living with his dependant at the time of his 
death to the person who actually incurred such expenditure. 


The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 247 
Calculation of Wages for Compensation: Section 4 of the 
Act provides that where the monthly wages of a workman 
exceed four thousand rupees, his monthly wages for the 
purpose of clause (a) and clause (b) shall be deemed to be four 
thousand rupees only. Now, therefore, all workmen except 
managerial and clerical staff without any wage limit are 
covered under the Act, the total lump sum compensation is 
determined by first determining the monthly wages, then 
finding out the relevant multiplying factor given in Schedule IV 
pertaining to the age of workman at the time of accident and 
then dividing it by the percentage payable vide section 4(a) for 
death and 4(b) for permanent total disablement. 
Illustrations 
(1) Amount of compensation in case of death: 
If a workman meets with an accident and dies in the course 
of employment at the age of 35 and at that time he drew 
monthly wages of Rs. 3,900 per month as per Schedule IV of the 
Act the relevant factor applicable to his case would be Rs. 
197.06. According to section 4(a) of the Act compensation 
payable would be an amount equal to fifty per cent of the 
monthly wages of deceased multiplied by the relevant factor, 
i.e., Rs. 197.06 and as such the amount of compensation payable 
to his dependants will be Rs. 3,84,267.00. The determination of 
the compensation will be arrived in the following manner:— 
50% of Rs. 3,900 = 1950 x 197.06 
= Rs. 3,84,267.00 
The minimum compensation in the case of death in no 
circumstances will be less than Rs. 80,000. 
(2) Amount of compensation in case of total disablement: 
If instead of death a workman suffers permanent total 
disablement as per section 4(b) of the Act the compensation 
payable will be an amount equal to 60% of the monthly wages of 
the injured workman multiplied by the relevant factor. However, 
the minimum amount of compensation will be Rs. 90,000 when it 
is less than that amount. Hence the amount of compensation 
would be 60 per cent of Rs. 3,900, i.e, equal to Rs. 2,340 vide 
section 4(b) multiplied by relevant factor in Schedule IV, i.e., Rs. 
197.06 and as such the amount of compensation payable will be 
Rs. 4,61,120.40. 


248 Labour Laws 
(3) Determination of compensation in case of injury (loss 
of thumb): 
If such a workman loses his thumb of one hand the 
calculation of compensation will be 30% of Rs. 4,61,120.40, 1.€., 
Rs. 1,38,336.12 (vide Schedule I Part II Serial No. 5) 
(4) Determination of compensation either in case of death, 
total disablement or injury: 
Assuming that a workman of 35 years of age has been getting 
Rs. 4,000 per month as his wages and meets with an accident 
then for the purpose of determining the amount of 
compensation, Explanation II of section 4 of the Act should be 
referred. While applying the aforesaid principle, the employee 
or his/her dependants as the case may be, will be entitled to the 
compensation, which shall be determined as follows:— 
(i) In case of death - Rs. 3,94,120.00 
(ii) In case of total disablement - Rs. 4,72,944.00 
(iii) In case of loss of thumb - Rs. 2,36,472.00 
COMPENSATION TO BE PAID WHEN DUE AND PENALTY FOR 
DEFAULT 
(1) Compensation under section 4 pertaining to amount of 
compensation shall be paid as soon as it falls due. 
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept the liability for 
compensation to the extent claimed he shall be bound to make 
provisional payment based on the extent of liability which he 
accepts, and such payment shall be deposited with the 
Commissioner or made to the workman, as the case may be, 
without prejudice to the right of the workman to make any further 
claim. 
(3) Where any employer is in default in paying the 
compensation due under this Act within one month from the date 
it fell due, the Commissioner shall— 
(a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount 
of the arrears, pay simple interest thereon at the rate of 
twelve per cent per annum or at such higher rate not 
exceeding the maximum of the lending rates of any 
scheduled bank as may be specified by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, on the 
amount due; and eT ag ea ep Ne, ORO eee ee eee ee ny ae aee re Tt cree one 


The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 249 
(b) If, in his opinion, there is no justification for the delay, 
direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount 
of the arrears, and interest thereon pay a further sum not 
exceeding fifty per cent, of such amount by way of 
penalty: 
Provided that an order for the payment of penalty shall not be 
passed under clause (b) without giving a reasonable opportunity 
to the employer to show cause why it should not be passed. 
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “scheduled 
bank” means a bank for the time being included in the Second 
Schedule to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. 
The interest payable under sub-section (3) shall be paid to the 
workman or his dependant as the case may be. 
METHOD OF CALCULATING WAGES 
Under the Workmen’s Compensation Act and for the purposes 
thereof the expression “monthly wages” means the amount of 
wages deemed to be payable for a month’s service whether the 
wages are payable by the month or by whatever other period or at 
piece rates and calculated as follows, namely :— 
(a) where the workman has, during a continuous period of 
not less than twelve months immediately preceding the 
accident, been in the service of the employer who is liable 
to pay compensation, the monthly wages of workman 
shall be one-twelfth of the total wages which have fallen 
due for payment to him by the employer in last twelve 
months of that period; 
(b) where the whole of the continuous period of service 
immediately preceding the accident during which the 
workman was in the service of the employer who is liable 
to pay the compensation was less than one month, the 
monthly wages of the workman shall be the average 
monthly amount which, during the twelve months 
immediately preceding the accident, was being earned by 
a workman employed by the same employer or, if there 
was no workman so employed, by a workman employed 
on similar work in the same locality; 
(c) in other cases including cases in which it is not possible 
for want of necessary information to calculate the 


250 Labour Laws 
monthly wages under clause (b), the monthly wages shall 
be thirty times the total wages earned in respect of last 
continuous period of service immediately preceding the 
accident from the employer who is liable to pay 
compensation, divided by the number of days comprising 
such period. 
Explanation.—A period of service shall, for the purposes of this 
section, be deemed to be continuous which has not been 
interrupted by a period of absence from work exceeding fourteen 
days. 
DISTRIBUTION OF COMPENSATION 
(1) No payment of compensation in respect of workman whose 
injury has resulted in death, and no payment of a lump sum as 
compensation to a workman or a person under legal disability, 
shall be made otherwise than by deposit with the Commissioner, 
and no such payment made directly by an employer shall be 
deemed to be a payment of compensation: 
Provided that, in the case of a deceased workman, an employer 
may make to any dependent advances on account of 
compensation of an amount equal to three months’ wages of such 
workman and so much of such amount as does not exceed the 
compensation payable to that dependant shall be deducted by the 
Commissioner from such compensation and repaid to the 
employer. 
(2) Any other sum amounting to not less than ten rupees which 
is payable as compensation may be deposited with the 
Commissioner on behalf of the person entitled thereto. 
(3) The receipt of the Commissioner shall be a sufficient 
discharge in respect of any compensation deposited with him. 
(4) On the deposit of any money under sub-section (1), as 
compensation in respect of a deceased workman the 
Commissioner shall, if he thinks necessary, cause notice to be 
published or to be served on each dependant in such manner as 
he thinks fit, calling upon the dependants to appear before him on 
such date as he may fix for determining the distribution of the 
compensation. If the Commissioner is satisfied after any inquiry 
which he may deem necessary, that no dependant exists, he shall 
repay the balance of the money to the employer by whom it was 


The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 251 
paid. The Commissioner shall, on application by the employer, 
furnish a statement showing in detail all disbursements made. 
(5) Compensation deposited in respect of a deceased workman 
shall, subject to any deduction made under sub-section (4) be 
apportioned among the dependants of the deceased workman or 
any of them in such proportion as the Commissioner thinks fit, or 
may, in the discretion of the Commissioner, be allotted to any one 
dependant. 
(6) Where any compensation deposited with the Commissioner 
is payable to any person, the Commissioner shall, if the person to 
whom the compensation is payable is not a woman or a person 
under a legal disability, and may, in other cases, pay the money to 
the person entitled thereto. 
(7) Where any lump sum deposited with the Commissioner is 
payable to a woman or a person under a legal disability, such sum 
may be invested, applied or otherwise dealt with for the benefit of 
the woman, or of such person during his disability, in such 
manner as the Commissioner may direct; and where a half- 
monthly payment is payable to any person under a legal disability 
the Commissioner may, on his own motion or on an application 
made to him in this behalf, order that the payment be made during 
the disability to any dependant of the workman or to any other 
person whom the Commissioner thinks best fitted to provide for 
the welfare of the workman. 
(8) Where, on application made to him in this behalf or 
otherwise, the Commissioner is satisfied that, on account of 
neglect of children on the part of a parent or on account of the 
variation of the circumstances of any dependant or for any other 
sufficient cause, an order of the Commissioner as to the 
distribution of any sum paid as compensation or as to the manner 
in which any sum payable to any such dependant is to be 
invested, applied or otherwise dealt with, ought to be varied, the 
Commissioner may make such orders for the variation of the 
former order as he thinks just in the circumstances of the case: 
Provided that no such order prejudicial to any person shall be 
made unless such person has been given an opportunity of 
showing cause why the order should not be made, or shall be 
made in any case in which it would involve the repayment by a 
dependant of any sum already paid to him. 


252 Labour Laws 
(9) Where the Commissioner varies any order under sub-section 
(8) by reason of the fact that payment of compensation to any 
person has been obtained by fraud, impersonation or other 
improper means any amount so paid to or on behalf of such 
person may be recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in 
section 31. 
POWER OF COMMISSIONER TO REQUIRE FROM EMPLOYER, 
STATEMENT REGARDING FATAL ACCIDENT 
(1) Where a Commissioner receives information from any 
source that a workman has died as a result of an accident arising 
out of and in the course of his employment, he may send by 
Registered Post a notice to the workman’s employer requiring him 
to submit within thirty days of the service of the notice, a 
statement, in the prescribed form, giving the circumstances 
attending the death of the workman, and indicating whether, in 
the opinion of the employer, he is or is not liable to deposit 
compensation on account of the death. 
(2) If the employer is of opinion that he is liable to deposit 
compensation he shall make the deposit within thirty days of the 
service of the notice. 
(3) If the employer is of opinion that he is not liable to deposit 
compensation, he shall in his statement indicate the grounds on 
which he disclaims liability. 
(4) Where, the employer has so disclaimed liability the 
Commissioner after making such inquiry as he may think fit, may 
inform any of the dependants of the deceased workman, that it is 
open to the dependant to prefer a claim for compensation, and 
may give them such other further information as he may think fit. 
REPORT OF FATAL ACCIDENTS AND SERIOUS BODILY INJURIES 
(1) Where, by any law for the time being in force, notice is 
required to be given to any authority, by or on behalf of an 
employer, of any accident occurring on his premises which results 
in death or serious bodily injury, the person required to give the 
notice shall, within seven days of the death or serious bodily 
injury, send a report to the Commissioner giving the 
circumstances attending the death or serious bodily injury: 
Provided that where the State Government has so prescribed 
the person required to give the notice may instead of sending such 


The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 253 
report to the Commissioner send it to the authority to whom he is 
required to give the notice. 
Explanation.—“Serious bodily injury” means an injury which 
involves, or in all probability will involve, the permanent injury to, 
any limb or the permanent loss of the use of, or permanent loss of 
or injury to the sight or hearing, or the fracture of any limb, or the 
enforced absence of the injured person from work for a period 
exceeding twenty days. 
(2) The State Government may, by a notification in the Official 
Gazette, extend the provisions of sub-section (1) to any class of 
premises other than those coming within the scope of that sub- 
section and may, by such notification, specify the persons who 
shall send the report to the Commissioner. 
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to the factories to which 
the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, applies. 
RETURN AS TO COMPENSATION 
The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, direct that every person employing workmen, or that any 
specified class of such persons, shall send at such time and in 
such form and to such authority, as may be specified in the 
notification, a correct return specifying the number of injuries in 
respect of which compensation has been paid by the employer 
during the previous years and the amount of such compensation, 
together with such other particulars as to the compensation as the 
State Government may direct. 
CONTRACTING OUT 
Any contract or agreement whether made before or after the 
commencement of this Act, whereby a workman relinquishes any 
right of compensation ftom the employer for personal injury 
arising out of or in the course of the employment, shall be null and 
void in so far as it purports to remove or reduce the liability of any 
person to pay compensation under this Act. 
POWER OF COMMISSIONER TO REQUIRE FURTHER DEPOSIT IN 
CASE OF FATAL ACCIDENT 
(1) Where any sum has been deposited by an employer as 
compensation payable in respect of a workman whose injury has 
resulted in death, and in the opinion of the Commissioner such 


254 Labour Laws 
sum is insufficient the Commissioner may, by notice in writing 
stating his reasons, call upon the employer to show cause why he 
should not make a further deposit within such time as may be 
stated in the notice. 
(2) If the employer fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the 
Commissioner, the Commissioner may make an award 
determining the total amount payable and requiring the employer 
to deposit the deficiency. 
REGISTRATION OF AGREEMENTS 
(1) Where the amount of any lump-sum payable as 
compensation has been settled by an agreement, whether by way 
of redemption of a half-monthly payment or otherwise, or where 
any compensation has been so settled as being payable to a 
woman or a person under a legal disability, a memorandum 
thereof shall be sent by the employer to the Commissioner, who 
shall, on being satisfied as to its genuineness, record the 
memorandum in a register in the prescribed manner : 
Provided that— 
(i) no such memorandum shall be recorded before seven 
days after communication by the Commissioner of notice 
to the parties concerned; 
(ii) the Commissioner may at any time rectify the register; 
(iii) where it appears to the Commissioner that an agreement 
as to the payment of lump-sum whether by way of 
redemption of half-monthly payment or otherwise, or an 
agreement as to the amount of compensation payable to a 
woman or a person under a legal disability ought not to 
be registered by reason of the inadequacy of the sum or 
amount, or by reason of the agreement having been 
obtained by fraud or undue influence or other improper 
means, he may refuse to record the memorandum of the 
agreement and may make such order, including an order 
as to any sum already paid under the agreement, as he 
thinks just in the circumstances. 
(2) An agreement for the payment of compensation which has 
been registered under the above provisions shall be enforceable 
under this Act, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian 
Contract Act, 1872, or in any other law for the time being in force. | 
i 
| . 
: | 


The Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923 255 
EFFECT OF FAILURE TO REGISTER AGREEMENT 
Where a memorandum of any agreement the registration of 
which is required by section 28, is not sent to the Commissioner as 
required by that section the employer shall be liable to pay the full 
amount of compensation which he is liable to pay under the 
provisions of this Act, and notwithstanding anything contained 
in the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 4, shall not, unless the 
Commissioner otherwise directs, be entitled to deduct more than 
half of any amount paid to the workman by way of compensation 
whether under the agreement or otherwise. 
PENALTIES 
(1) Whoever— 
(a) fails to maintain notice-book which he is required to 
maintain under sub-section (3) of section 10 pertaining to 
notice of claim; or 
(b) fails to send to the Commissioner a statement which he is 
required to send under sub-section (1) of section 10A 
pertaining to powers of the Commissioner required from 
an employer regarding fatal accident; 
(c) fails to send a report which he is required to send under 
section 10B pertaining to report of fatal accidents and 
serious bodily injuries; 
(d) fails to make a return which he is required to make under 
section 16, 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees. 
(2) No prosecution under this section shall be instituted except 
by or with the previous sanction of a Commissioner, and no court 
shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, unless 
complaint thereof is made within six months of the date on which 
the alleged commission of the offence came to the knowledge of 
the Commissioner. 




CHECK-LIST 
OTHER RELATED MATTERS 
Hours of work-rest, overtime and spread-over 
me wy Leave & holidays 
INS sss Leave admissible to workers under the Factories Act 
EE, Transfer of employees 
_— 
Procedure for disciplinary action 
Procedure to conduct a domestic enquiry 
roW Punishment 
7) 
Resignation of an employee and legal implications 
Law relating to retirement of an employee 
Retiral benefits to employees in private employment 


22. Other Related Matters _— 
Although all the important Labour Acts have been dealt and 
explained in this book there are many areas of day-to-day 
importance which are not enacted by the Government but have 
developed by practices and judicial interpretations. In order to 
enhance the utility of the book and for the information of the 
readers, the important subjects are dealt with hereinafter. 
HOURS OF WORK 
The health and efficiency of workers depend mostly on the 
number of hours they have to work. In case of long working 
hours, the operative is bound to be tired and slack in his duties. 
Such tiresomeness often becomes the cause of his shattered health, 
which ultimately tells upon the efficiency of a worker. Besides, if 
the hours of work are long, the workers develop the habit of 
loitering and loafing away the time under various pretexts. 
According to Factories Act, 1948, the hours of work remain the 
same, 1.¢., 48 hours per week and 9 hours per day with a ‘spread 
over’ of 10% hours. It removes the distinction between perennial 
and seasonal factories. For children and adolescents, the hours 
have been fixed at 4% per day with a ‘spread-over’ of 5 hours. 
After every five hours of work, a rest interval of half an hour is 
provided for adult workers. Provisions have also been made for 
weekly holidays and leave with wages. Employment of women 
and children between 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. is prohibited but is being 
allowed in some of the States. Overtime is to be paid twice the 
258 3 
| 
7 
j 7 
1 
: 
: 


Other Related Matters 259 
normal rate of wages. No worker is allowed to work in two 
factories on the same day. In case of workers in night shifts, it has 
become necessary to provide them 24 consecutive hours’ rest every 
week. The State Governments have been empowered to grant 
exemption to certain categories of workers from the provision 
relating to hours of work but in case of such exemptions the total 
number of hours of work should not exceed 10 hours a day and 50 
hours a week and the ‘spread-over’ 12 hours a day. When an 
employee is not working in a factory, then his working hours are 
fixed under the Shops and Establishments Act of that particular 
State. Like Factories Act, forty-eight hours working in a week is 
provided in Shops and Establishments Act. Although, the daily 
time limit is 9 hours for factory workers it ranges from 8 to 12 
hours for shops and establishments employees but total hours for 
the week must not exceed 48. 
HOURS OF WORK—REST, OVERTIME AND SPREAD-OVER 
UNDER SHOPS & ESTABLISHMENTS ACT OF THE STATES 
Ordinary Withovertime Quarterly Period Spread- 
over-time ofRest over 
Daily Weekly Daily Weekly limit — in hour(s) 
Andhra Pradesh 1 after 5 
Assam 
Shops 1 after 4 
Commercial 1 after 4 
Establishment 
apes 
(Maharashtra 
Gujarat) 
Shops 1 after 5 
Commercial 1 after 5 
Establishment 
Restaurant 1 after 5 
Theatre 1 after 5 
Delhi 
Shops 
Commercial ¥% after 5 
Establishment 


260 Labour Laws 
yea oe | See OP Oa | Himachal Pads] 9 | a | | 30 | Frau pag |S ela ied Mc es 
12 
12 
14 
12 
1 ae 
Pe dl dd eee te Rajasthan =| 9 | 48 | to | | | afters | 12 | TamilNadu__— | 8_| 48 | 10 | 54 | | taftera | 12 | JUttarPradesh | 8 | 48 | 10 | | 50 | Matters | 12 
were fee | [| am | tates fio 
Note.—’Hours of work’ means the time during which the 
persons employed at the disposal of the employer exclusive of any 
interval allowed for rest and meals and hours worked has 
corresponding meaning. —" 
Madhya Pradesh 
Shops 
Commercial 
Establishment 
Restaurant 
Theatre 
‘Week’ means the period of seven days beginning at mid-night 
on Saturday. 
‘Day’ means a period of twenty-four hours beginning at mid- 
night. Provided that in the case of an employee whose hours of 
work extended beyond mid-night, day means the period of 
twenty-four hours beginning when such employment commences 
irrespective of mid-night. 
‘Rest’ means that no period of continuous work shall exceed 
the prescribed number of hours. 
‘Spread-over’ means the period between the commencement 
and the termination of the work of an employee on any day. 
LEAVE AND HOLIDAYS 
Although ‘leave’ has been dealt under the Chapter on Factories 
Act this subject being of day-to-day importance it is imperative to 
explain it separately also. 


Other Related Matters 261 
DISTINCTION BETWEEN LEAVE AND HOLIDAYS 
A reference to item 4 of Schedule III appended to the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 would make it abundantly clear that holidays 
stand on a different footing altogether from leave with wages, or 
leave facilities. Holidays are off-days granted by the employer to 
their workmen either voluntarily or compulsorily under the force 
of law. On a holiday the entire business is closed and no one 
works while in case of leave the entire business is running. It 
would thus be seen that there is a fundamental distinction 
between leave and holidays. 
FESTIVAL AND NATIONAL HOLIDAYS 
The holidays declared under the Negotiable Instruments Act 
are usually applicable to Government departments more 
particularly to banks and they are not generally adopted by 
factories and other establishments in the private and public sector. 
The factory legislations also do not provide for the grant of festival 
holidays to industrial workers. But inspite of that, some quantum 
of festivals and national holidays with pay is prevalent in 
factories and other industrial establishments. Generally, the 
occupiers of factories fix the number of such holidays in their 
standing orders or service rules. Apart from this, States are very 
generous in declaring paid holidays. 
LEAVE ADMISSIBLE TO WORKERS UNDER THE FACTORIES ACT 
Leave to employees is granted on the basis of statutory 
provisions, agreements, settlements, customs, usages or practices. 
Section 79 of the Factories Act, 1948 as amended by Act 94 of 1976 
with effect from 26th October, 1976 provides for earned leave with 
wages to the workers in addition to the weekly offs and 
compensatory holidays. _ 
(i) Qualifying service for entitlement of leave.—Under section 
79 of the Act as amended w.e.f. 26th October, 1976, every worker 
who has worked for a period of 240 days or more in a factory 
during a calendar year is qualified for annual leave with wages to 
be availed by him during the subsequent calendar year or during 
any other calendar year. But a worker whose service commences 
otherwise than on the first day of January shall be entitled to leave 
with wages only if he has worked for two-thirds of the total 
number of days in the remainder of the calendar year. 


262 Labour Laws 
(ii) Calculation of leave.—In regard to an adult employee, the 
leave with wages is to be calculated at the rate of one day for every 
twenty days of work performed by him during the previous 
calendar year while in the case of a child worker, such leave is to 
be calculated at the rate of one day for every fifteen days of work 
performed by him during the previous calendar year and for the 
purpose of computation of the period of 240 days or more, the 
following should be deemed to be the days on which such 
workers have worked in a factory:— 
(a) any days of lay-off, by agreement or contract or as 
permissible under the standing orders; 
(b) in the case of a female worker, maternity leave for any 
number of days not exceeding twelve weeks; and 
(c) the leave earned in the year prior to that in which the 
leave is enjoyed. 
The leave admissible under the above provisions is exclusive of 
all holidays whether occurring during or at either end of the 
period of leave. But it may be noted that an adult worker whose 
service commences otherwise than on the first day of January is 
entitled to one day leave with wages for every twenty days of work 
performed by him while in the case of a child worker, such leave is 
to be calculated at the rate of one day for every fifteen days of work 
performed by him provided such workers have worked for two- 
thirds of the total number of days in the remainder of the calendar 
year. 
(iii) Leave to discharged or dismissed worker.—If a worker is 
discharged or dismissed from service or quits his employment or 
is superannuated or dies while in service during the course of the 
calendar year, he or his heir or nominee, as the case may be, is 
entitled to wages in lieu of the quantum of leave to which he was 
entitled immediately before his discharge, dismissal, quitting of 
employment, superannuation or death calculated at the rates 
specified above even if he had not worked for the entire period of 
240 days or for two-thirds of the total number of days in the 
remainder of the calender year and the payment in lieu of such 
unavailed leave is to be made before the expiry of the second 
working day from the date of discharge, dismissal or quitting but 
where the worker is superannuated or dies while in service the 
payment in lieu of such unavailed leave is to be made before the 


Other Related Matters 263 
expiry of two months from the date of such superannuation or 
death and in calculating leave under this provision of the Act, 
fraction of leave of half a day or more is to be treated as one full 
day’s leave but fraction of less than half a day should be omitted. 
In addition to the above, it may also be borne in mind that if a 
worker does not in any one calendar year avail the whole of the 
leave allowed to him during the previous calendar year then any 
such leave not taken by him should be added to the leave to be 
allowed to him in the succeeding calendar year provided that the 
total number of days of leave that may be carried forward to the 
succeeding year should not exceed thirty in the case of an adult or 
forty in the case of a child. It has been further provided in the 
Factories Act that a worker who has applied for leave with wages 
but has not been given such leave as aforesaid shall be entitled to 
carry forward leave refused without any limit. 
In other words, in a case where the worker applies for leave 
with wages but is not given such leave, then in that eventuality he 
is entitled to carry forward the entire unavailed leave without any 
limit. 
(iv) Leave—How to be availed of ?—A worker desirous of 
availing of the leave earned by him during the preceding calender 
year has to make an application for such leave at least fifteen days 
before the date on which he wishes to proceed on leave in writing 
to the manager but in case the worker is employed in a public 
utility service as defined in clause (n) of section 2 of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947 then such leave application in writing should 
be made not less than thirty days before the date on which he 
wants his leave to begin. Such leave can be availed in minimum 
three instalments during the year. The leave as aforesaid can also 
be availed in case of illness and when such leave is to be availed 
due to illness then even the formalities for applying for leave in 
advance as stated above are not necessary. In short, the Factories 
Act contemplates that if a worker wants to avail himself of the 
leave with wages due to him to cover a period of illness, he shall 
be granted such leave even if the application for leave is not made 
within the time specified above and in such a case wages as 
admissible under section 81 of the said Act shall be paid within 
fifteen days in non-public utility service and in case of a public 
utility service within thirty days from the date of the application 
for leave. An application for leave which is made well in time 
should not ordinarily be refused. 


264 Labour Laws 
(v) Payment in lieu of unavailed leave on termination, etc.—If 
the employment of a worker, who is entitled to leave as aforesaid, 
is terminated by the occupier before he has taken the entire leave 
to which he is entitled, or if having applied for and having not 
been granted such leave, the worker quits his employment before 
he has taken the leave, the occupier of the factory has to pay him 
the amount payable under section 80 in respect of the leave not 
taken and such payment is to be made, where the employment of 
the worker is terminated by the occupier, before the expiry of the 
second working day after such termination, and where a worker 
who quits his employment, on or before the next pay day. It may 
also be borne in mind that the unavailed leave of a worker has not 
to be taken into consideration in computing the period of any 
notice required to be given before discharge or dismissal. The 
intention of the legislature in enacting sub-section (ii) of section 79 
seems to enjoin upon the occupier to make payment on a day on 
which the factory is working, providing punishment for breach if 
payment is not made on the second working day after termination 
of the service, without affecting the right of the aggrieved worker 
to recover the amount in accordance with law. 
(vi) Whether leave can be claimed as of right?—The dictionary 
meaning of the word, “leave” being permission and unless such 
permission is given or leave sought is granted, no person can 
absent himself from duty in an unauthorised manner. In other 
words, “leave” means permission obtained by an employee from 
his employer relieving him from the duty to attend his work. It, 
therefore, follows that leave should be taken in advance before an 
employee intends to proceed on leave. In short, no workman can 
proceed on leave without first applying for and obtaining it. 
When leave has accrued to an employee then normally it is his 
right to get it but from what time leave should be sanctioned has to 
be adjusted according to the exigencies as and when it accrues or 
is applied for irrespective of the consideration for the business 
exigencies and necessities. This shows that even though an 
employee is entitled to and eligible for a certain period of leave, he 
cannot as a matter of right demand that the same should be 
granted to him at a particular time when he applies for the same 
or whenever he applies for the same. The reason is that at the 
particular time when he applies for leave the pressure of work or 
exigencies of service may be such that his services cannot be 


Other Related Matters 265 
spared. But at the same time it cannot also be denied that he has 
got a right to have his leave application considered and disposed 
of properly, bona fide and in accordance with law. In other words, 
when a discretion is conferred on the employer then the exercise of 
that discretion has to be exercised in the bona fide exercise of the 
powers and not in a mala fide manner. 
(vii) Obligation of an employer to grant leave.—Unless leave is 
applied for, the question of its sanction does not arise and in case 
a worker remains absent from work without leave having been 
granted or sanctioned to him, he exposes himself to disciplinary 
action. Normally when leave has accrued to an employee it is his 
right to get it but from what time leave should be sanctioned has to 
be adjusted according to the exigencies of business of the 
employer and that leave cannot be sanctioned as and when it 
accrues or is applied for, irrespective of the consideration for the 
business exigencies and necessities. An employer is, however, 
under an equitable obligation to grant leave to an employee upto 
the maximum limit at his credit for bona fide reasons and so long 
as the employee does not exceed that limit or does not absent 
himself without any prior sanction or previous intimation under 
unforeseen circumstances, he cannot be charged with any 
irregularity in attendance. The reason is that every man is likely to 
have social obligations and he may fall ill at times and there may 
be deaths and illness in his family. It will be idle for the employer 
to expect that one cannot be taken ill. Though in law the anxiety of 
employer to carry on his business has preference within certain 
limits set out by statutory provisions and service rules the fact that 
sometimes the requirements of an employee may be so urgent and 
pressing that it may be impossible for him to wait, cannot be lost 
sight of. It, therefore, follows that the employer cannot refuse leave 
to a workman due to circumstances beyond his control. 
(viii) Application for leave with reasons if necessary.—It is 
now well established that whenever an employee wishes to 
proceed on leave, it is necessary that he must make an application 
for leave with reasons therefor. The reasons for taking leave 
should also not be vague. In fact, remaining absent without any 
application or intimation is a serious misconduct. Even if the close 
relation of an employee is stated to be ill, the employee cannot 
walk out of the establishment without applying and _ taking 
anybody’s permission and when such an act is repeated then he 


266 Labour Laws 
can be discharged and in that eventuality his discharge would be 
bona fide. The principle that leave should be taken in advance is 
also applicable in case of extension of leave. A worker is, therefore, 
under an obligation to send his application for leave sufficiently 
in advance so that the leave may be sanctioned to him before his 
original leave expires. The reason is that if a belated application is 
received then it is entirely at the discretion of the employer 
whether to sanction it or not. In case the leave is sanctioned then 
the absence is completely justified because the employer retains 
the right to sanction leave with retrospective effect. In case, the 
extension is not granted then the worker would be treated as 
absent and would be liable to disciplinary action. Sending of an 
application for extension of leave the same day on which the 
employee is scheduled to report for duty by ordinary post is a 
misconduct. The ordinary rule, however, is that extension should 
be applied for well in time with reasons therefor. 
(ix) Obligation of workers to produce medical certificates in 
case of sickness.—The ordinary rule is that in case of grant of 
leave, application should be sent in advance but this rule is 
subject to some relaxation in case of sickness. It is now generally 
recognised that the employer has a right to demand leave 
application even in case of sickness accompanied by the medical 
certificate, but when the application for sick leave is accompanied 
by a medical certificate then the said certificate should generally 
be believed. It is also generally held that when the application for 
sick leave accompanied by the medical certificate is received then 
it should be granted. In such a case when the leave is refused by 
the employer without any sufficient reason the action of the 
employer cannot be sustained as being arbitrary and capricious. 
But it does not mean that the employer cannot demand a medical 
certificate and cannot refuse sick leave when asked for on account 
of the failure of the workman to produce the medical certificate. 
The reason being that it is within the right of the employer to insist 
upon the production of medical certificate, specially when the 
leave applied for is for a fairly long period. In such cases, if the 
workman remains absent without leave he is to blame himself and 
not the employer. 
Note: 
The shops and establishments which are not governed by the 
Factories Act are covered by the Shops and Establishment Acts as 


Other Related Matters 267 
enacted by every State. The quantum, qualifying period and 
accumulation of leave varies in some States but the principles 
pertaining to leave are by and large the same. 
TRANSFER OF EMPLOYEES 
Transfers are the part and parcel of employment. Of course, 
there is no dearth of such instances when many people have spent 
their whole life at one place. Transferring of an employee is 
nothing new. It was prevalent even during the rules of Mauryas 
and Guptas. One reason given for the transfers is that it helps 
maintain the national integrity because an employee is able to 
understand more about many regions. Apart from this, it is also 
seen that people develop vested interests if they are allowed to 
work at a particular place, for a very long period of time. 
Transfers have caused a lot of bad blood, anger, frustration and 
disgust. There are no two opinions that if transfers are done for 
improving the functioning they are most welcome, but if done 
with ill intentions or for punishment then they certainly cause 
dispute and frustration. As per the rules an employer has the right 
to transfer the employees from one place to another. Non- 
compliance of the transfer order by the employee amounts to 
misconduct. There are, however, certain norms which are to be 
observed by an employer while transferring any employee. 
It is necessary that there is an exigency of work which has 
prompted the management for the transfer, of the employee. 
Further, an employer should always have uppermost the interest 
of an employee in his mind and transfers should not be actuated 
with even any indirect ulterior motive or any kind of mala fides. 
The transfers should not be made for the purpose of victimising 
or harassing any employee. 
As a matter of fact, the right of employer to transfer his 
employees is inherent and implicit in the contract of employment. 
There is no doubt that any employer is the best judge to know the 
capacity of his employees. He also knows well where and when 
the capacities of any employee could best be utilised. But at the 
same time, employer has no right to transfer his employee to a new 
concern started by him subsequent to the date of employment of 
his employee unless it is so stated in the terms of his employment 
that he would also be liable to be transferred to any of the existing 
concerns or new ones started by him in future. However, the right 


268 Labour Laws 
of an employer to transfer his employee from one station to 
another though within the discretion of the employer is always 
subject to the condition that the terms of contract of employment of 
an employee are not adversely affected. 
The powers of Labour Courts/Industrial Tribunals to interfere 
with the order of transfer of an employee from one place or station 
to another are very limited. Ordinarily, it would be proper for them 
to accept as correct any submission by the employer that the 
impugned order of transfer was made only because it was found 
unavoidable in the interest of the business. In such cases, the 
submission of the employer, that the transfer was unavoidable 
must be accepted without calling upon him to lead positive 
evidence. The only exception to this principle is the case where 
there is reason to believe that the action is mala fide or 
victimisation or unfair labour practice or due to some other 
ulterior motive not connected with the business interest of the 
employer. In other words, the powers of transfer from one station 
to another or from one establishment or branch to another can be 
exercised only when such transfer is in the interest of the 
business. The order of transfer is liable to be set aside only if it is 
shown that it has not been effected bona fide or for ordinary and 
normal reasons of trade or business but has been the result of an 
unfair labour practice. The orders of transfer are generally 
challenged on the ground of victimisation, unfair labour practice, 
or mala fide but when they are challenged on such grounds, the 
employees have to lead positive evidence of their own to show 
that they were transferred because of their union activities. 
The position is the same when an order of transfer is 
challenged on compassionate grounds. The compassionate 
ground also has to be considered in the back-ground of 
administrative interest which is also one of the vital 
considerations to be taken into account. 
PROCEDURE FOR DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
Surprisingly there is no procedure prescribed for disciplinary 
action either in Industrial Disputes Act or in the rules made 
thereunder, which should be complied with, before inflicting 
punishment on an industrial worker who has been guilty of a 
misconduct. The procedure is evolved by various High Courts and 
Supreme Court in appeal under Article 226 and Article 136 of the 


Other Related Matters 269 
Constitution of India respectively. This procedure is based on 
principles of natural justice. Broadly speaking the following 
requirements are sine qua non for inflicting punishment upon a 
workman—(1) charge-sheet, (2) holding a domestic enquiry 
according to principles of natural justice, (3) report of the enquiry 
officer, (4) show cause notice, (5) order of punishment. Breach of 
this procedure also does not give worker a right to re-instatement 
unless injustice is caused. What has to be seen in these types of 
cases is not whether this procedure is followed, but whether 
alleged misconduct is proved. 
MISCONDUCT 
The first duty of the employee is to obey the orders which the 
employer is justified in giving under the terms of employment. All 
orders concerning the work which the employee is required to do 
and the time, the manner and the place of performing it are 
presumable and in the absence of any special circumstances, are 
within the control of the employer. 
Though there is no fixed rule of law defining the degree of 
‘misconduct’ which will justify dismissal misconduct 
inconsistent with the fulfilment of an express or implied condition 
of service justifies dismissal. Misconduct is made of two words. 
‘Mis’ means bad and ‘conduct’ means behaviour. In fact, 
‘misconduct’ is a relative term and occurs in various enactments 
and so it has to be construed with reference to the subject matter 
and the context in which it occurs, having regard to the scope of 
the enactment under reference. It literally means, to conduct amiss, 
to mismanage, wrong or improper conduct, bad behaviour 
unlawful behaviour or conduct. The synonyms are misbehaviour; 
misdemeanour; mismanagement; misdeed; delinquency; offence. It 
implies a wrongful intention and not a mere error of judgment. It 
does not necessarily imply corruption or criminal intent. An 
omission to do what is expected of a person to do constitutes 
misconduct whereas if such failure is directed to intentionally 
cause mischief or loss, to any person then it is called wilful 
misconduct. This shows that, “misconduct” is a_ specific 
connotation. It is not mere inefficiency or slackness. It is 
something far more positive and certainly, deliberate disobedience 
of any order of a superior authority would be a species of 
misconduct. Where the employer levels the charge of 


270 Labour Laws 
“misconduct”, i.e., a charge of some positive act or of conduct 
which would be quite incompatible with express and implied 
norms of the relationship of the workman to the employer, there 
must be material in support of such a serious charge. Such a 
charge cannot be brought against a workman for not having 
obeyed the directions of a third party who was not a person in 
authority over the workman, even though such third person had 
some interest in the business of the employer. The term, 
‘misconduct’ usually implies an act done wilfully with a wrong 
intention and as applied to professional acts, even though such 
acts are not inherently wrongful, it also means dereliction of or 
deviation from duty. The word, ‘misconduct’ is a generic term 
while the insubordination, neglect of work, etc., are species 
thereof. 
Thus ‘misconduct’ is the doing of something or the omitting to 
do something which is wrong to do or omit, whereas the person 
who is guilty of the act or the omission knows that the act which 
he is doing, or that which he is omitting to do, is wrong thing to 
do or omit. It, therefore, follows that ‘misconduct’ may or may not 
be wilful. In fact, the term ‘misconduct’ is wide enough to include 
wrongful commission or omission whether done or omitted to be 
done intentionally or unintentionally, or to put it in another way a 
‘misconduct’ arises if a person does what he should not have 
done and does not do what he should have done or any 
unbusiness like conduct including negligence or want of 
necessary care. 
The conclusion that emerges from the above discussion is that a 
misconduct need not be wilful. Therefore, any breach of an 
express or implied duty on the part of an employee, unless it be of 
a trifling nature, would amount to misconduct. If an act has 
nothing to do with the relationship of employer and employee or 
the latter’s duty or work as an employee, it would not be a 
misconduct because it will have no effect on the terms and 
conditions of service of the employee. The rule of law is that where 
a person has entered into the position of an employee if he does 
anything incompatible with the due or faithful discharge of his 
duty to his master, the latter has a right to dismiss him. The 
relationship of master and servant implies necessarily that the 
servant shall be in a position to perform his duty duly and 
faithfully, and if by his own act he prevents himself from doing so, 


Other Related Matters a 
the master may dismiss him. What circumstances will put an 
employee into the position of not being able to perform his duty in 
a due manner, or it is impossible to enumerate. Innumerable 
circumstances have actually occurred which fall within that 
proposition and innumerable other circumstances which never 
have yet occurred or will occur, which also will fall within the 
proposition. This shows that any breach of an express or implied 
duty on the part of a servant, unless it be of a trifling nature, 
affords justification for a dismissal. The primary duties being 
obedience, fidelity, care, honesty, and punctuality, conduct 
opposed to the due fulfilment of these duties will entitle the master 
to dismiss. So, in order to decide as to what act is contrary to the 
faithful discharge of duties on the part of an employee, it has to be 
seen the basic nature of relationship of employer and employee 
and as discussed earlier, the test of employer and employee 
relationship is that the employee will abide by the instructions of 
the employer regarding the manner in which the work is to be 
done. The reason is that when a person enters into a contract of 
employment as an employee, he impliedly agrees to abide by the 
instructions of the employer in respect of the manner of 
performing his duties and obligations. 
In every contract of service, there is an implied condition that 
the employee will work faithfully. If he does not work faithfully, 
the employer is entitled to ask for rescission of the contract. It is 
said to be an implied term of fidelity. It is also an implied term of 
contract that the servant will be subordinate and will work in 
accordance with the discipline set up by his employer. It is also an 
implied term that an employee will personally perform the 
contract and will not assign the performance of the contract to any 
other person. Another implied term of the contract under the 
common law is the obligation on the part of the employee to 
account for in respect of monies and properties received by him 
either from his employer or from anybody else on his behalf. The 
obligation to account for is a direct corollary of the obligation to 
faithfully perform duties. The obligation is assumed because in 
the absence of any such assumption the contract of employment 
will be unworkable or in any case it is an assumption based on 
equitable grounds in view of the peculiar nature of the contract 
itself. The liability of personal performance on the part of an 
employee gives rise to another implied term of the contract of 


272 Labour Laws 
competence. This means that the employee has warranted that he 
is reasonably fit for the job which he undertakes. In other words, if 
after entering into service he becomes incompetent for any reason 
then the employer is entitled to put an end to the contract. The 
concept of misconduct in employer and employee relationship is 
based upon the nature and relationship itself and implied and 
express conditions of service. Amongst others, the following acts 
on the part of an employee have been held to be misconduct:— 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) any act or conduct which is prejudicial or is likely to be 
prejudicial to the interests of the employer or to the 
reputation of the employer; 
any act or conduct inconsistent or incompatible with the 
due or peaceful discharge of the workman’s duty to his 
employer; 
any act or conduct of a worker which makes it unsafe for 
the employer to retain him in service; 
any act or conduct of an employee which is so grossly 
immoral so as to make him untrustworthy in the eyes of 
reasonable men; 
any act or conduct of an employee which makes it 
impossible for the employer to rely on his faithfulness; 
any act or conduct of an employee which is such as to 
open before him temptations for not discharging his 
duties properly; 
any act or conduct of an employee which disturbs the 
peaceful functioning at the place of work; 
use of filthy or abusive language against co-employees, 
officers or employer; 
insulting behaviour and in-subordination as to make it 
impossible to retain the relation of master and servant; 
habitual neglect of duties for which a worker is paid; 
neglect of the employee, though isolated which causes or 
tends to cause serious and harmful consequences; 
theft, fraud or dishonesty in connection with the 
employer’s business; 
illegal strike; 


Other Related Matters 273 
(14) breach of duty, absence without leave, non-performance 
of job-duties, disobedience of orders; 
(15) Breach of discipline, disrespect to or assaulting superiors 
or subversion of discipline, disrupting relations with co- 
workers; 
(16) Delinquencies like telling lies, committing theft, fraud, 
dishonesty, disloyalty and corruption, damage to 
property or goodwill; 
(17) Disabling or disrespectful conduct, disreputable outside 
conduct. 
CHARGE-SHEET 
The ordinary meaning of “charge-sheet” is a memorandum of 
charges, i.e., acts of omissions alleged to have been committed by 
an employee. It consists of facts and allegations which the person 
issuing wants to establish against the employee committing a 
breach of rules or misconduct in terms of the standing orders or 
any act inconsistent with the fulfilment of the obligations implied 
in the contract of employment. In short, a charge-sheet is an 
allegation of misconduct, misbehaviour, indiscipline, lack of 
interest in work, negligence, etc., on the part of the employee. It is 
not used in the sense in which it has been used in section 410 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. It, therefore, follows that a 
charge-sheet is a memorandurn of accusations which are levelled 
against an employee who commits a breach of any rules, 
regulations, standing orders or an implied term of contract. In 
other words, a charge-sheet is nothing but a paper or document 
containing the alleged acts of misconduct against an employee. 
The core of the matter is that no disciplinary action can be 
initiated against an employee or a workman unless he is first 
served with a charge-sheet containing all charges and their 
essential particulars. 
The basic requirement of drafting a charge-sheet is that it 
should give to the employee a fair idea of the case which he is to 
face. So, while drafting a charge-sheet, care must be taken to see 
that it contains all the facts and for this, the standing orders as 
well as the service rules which define various misconducts must 
be read carefully. If a particular act, e.g., absence without leave, 
late attendance or negligence, is a misconduct when it is an 
habitual one then the word, “habitual” is an essential constituent 


274 Labour Laws 
of the charge and must be mentioned in the charge-sheet. 
Similarly, if a particular act, such as affixing posters, riotous or 
disorderly behaviour or collecting subscription, etc., is a 
misconduct when it takes place on the premises during working 
hours then these are also essential elements of misconduct and 
must be mentioned in the charge-sheet. If gross negligence is a 
misconduct then the words, “gross” is also an essential part of the 
charge and must be mentioned in the charge-sheet. This shows 
that while drafting a charge-sheet, care must be taken to ensure 
that the charge-sheet mentions all the essential ingredients of a 
particular misconduct. Apart from the above, the charge-sheet 
should also mention the particulars of time, place and manner of 
the incident in order to make the charge specific, because at times 
they also form part of the charge itself. When riotous behaviour 
during working hours is a misconduct, then at other times it 
would not be a misconduct and so, in that eventuality, time would 
be a part of the charge. The reason is that if a particular act is 
misconduct when committed on the premises of the establishment, 
then the place is a part of the charge itself. So, while drafting a 
charge-sheet, an attempt should be to ensure that the charge 
mentioned in the charge-sheet is specific as well as complete in all 
essential constituents. The reason is that the charge is not an 
accusation made or information given in the abstract but a 
concrete accusation made against a person in respect of an act 
either committed or omitted to be done in violation of the law. 
When the charge is for striking work in contravention of the 
provision of law then the provision which is said to have been 
contravened must be mentioned in the charge-sheet otherwise the 
charge-sheet would be vague. If a person is in the habit of 
disobeying the instructions of his superiors then each act of 
disobedience must be mentioned separately in the charge-sheet so 
that the employee concerned knows the actual incidents with 
which he is charged. But when there is nothing to indicate that 
there are any rules of the establishment under which the employee 
is indicated to obey the orders then the charge of orders, which 
were not enforceable under any rules, can never be the basis of 
any order of dismissal or removal. While framing a charge, any 
document or record which is looked into or relied upon must be 
disclosed in the charge-sheet so that the employee may have the 
opportunity of dealing with it. The reason is that an employer 
cannot justify his action on any ground other than those 


Other Related Matters 275 
contained in the charge-sheet. This shows that great care has to be 
taken while framing the charge-sheet against an erring employee. 
Apart from the above, in the standing orders or service rules, 
there are certain offences or misconducts which have got specific 
name viz., ‘theft’, “criminal breach of trust’, ‘misappropriation’, 
‘forgery’, disobedience, ‘strike’, ‘go-slow’ and ‘negligence’, etc. 
While drafting a charge-sheet it is desirable that an act of 
misconduct be called in the specific name which is given to it 
under the standing orders or service rules. When the misconduct 
is “to go on strike” then it should not be called “stopping work in 
concert” because this does not give a clear idea which can be 
given by use of the simple word, “strike”. In the same way, when 
the misconduct is of disobedience of orders, it should not be 
described as disregard or non-performance of orders. The reason 
is obvious. There are various distinctions between the meaning of 
one word and another and it is always safer to use language of 
standing orders in order to ensure that the same meaning is 
entertained. When the charge is that the employee took away new 
parts taking away of new parts is no charge unless theft is 
attributed. Similarly, when the behaviour of a particular employee 
was described as unmannerly or rude this does not amount to a 
charge of riotous behaviour. When it is mentioned in the charge- 
sheet that the employee was negligent and at the same time 
various warnings and suspensions which related to inefficiency 
were also referred to in the charge it would not amount to charge 
of negligence. 
The whole object of drawing up a charge-sheet is to give an 
opportunity to the person charged. The principles of natural 
justice also require that the person charged should know precisely 
the nature of the offence so that he may be able to explain about it 
and prove his innocence in the matter. Vague allegations should 
also be avoided while drafting a charge-sheet and care must be 
taken to see that there should be no verbiage. The use of 
abbreviations such as “etc. etc.” or “any other document” should 
be avoided and reference should be made to specific thing or 
person. Likewise, exceptions should also not be mentioned in the 
charge-sheet. When, however, the charge is of resorting to an 
illegal strike it must be remembered that the illegality of strike is a 
constituent part of the charge itself and so, it must be specifically 
mentioned in the charge-sheet. The contents of the charge-sheet 


276 Labour Laws 
should not indicate that the employee is guilty of a misconduct. 
Normally, the charge-sheet should be drafted in a language which 
the employee can easily understand, and while drafting a charge- 
sheet care must also be taken to see that it satisfies the following 
conditions:— 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(k) 
(1) the charge-sheet must specify the charges in the clearest 
possible language with full particulars; 
the charge-sheet must disclose the misconduct with 
which the employee is charged; 
the language used in the charge-sheet must be clear, 
precise, unambiguous and free from vagueness; 
it will not be enough if the employer informs his employee 
by means of a charge-sheet that he was wilfully slowing 
down the performance and on the contrary it is 
incumbent on the employer to furnish all necessary 
particulars of slowing down of performance before he is 
called upon to meet the charge; 
the charge-sheet should not contain unnecessary matters 
though mentioning of such unnecessary matters may not 
be fatal to the charge-sheet; 
the use of abbreviations viz. “etc. etc” or “any other 
document” should be avoided and instead, reference 
should be made to specific things or person; 
whenever, it is necessary to give the time of an incident in 
the charge-sheet the word, “about” must be mentioned; 
it must also be seen that there is no misdescription of any 
charge; 
in case of disobedience, the order disobeyed must be 
mentioned; 
in case of theft, full particulars of the goods stolen must be 
given; 
in case of mis-appropriation, all particulars regarding the 
amount misappopriated must be given; 
when the charge is of falsification of accounts, if the 
details of the particular items in respect of which the act 
of falsification of accounts was committed are not 
mentioned, the omission is fatal to the charge; 


Other Related Matters 277 
(m) it must also be seen that the charge-sheet is not devoid of 
essential particulars. 
SERVICE OF CHARGE-SHEET 
The service of charge-sheet on the employee concerned is a pre- 
requisite to the validity of a domestic enquiry. The reason is that in 
case it is established that no charge-sheet was served upon the 
employee concerned the entire subsequent proceedings of the 
domestic enquiry would be absolutely invalid and ineffective. It is, 
therefore, of utmost importance to find out before initiating the 
domestic enquiry that there is sufficient material on record to 
show the service of the charge-sheet on the employee concerned. 
The most common mode for service of the charge-sheet is by 
personal service. The charge-sheet may be handed over to the 
employee and his signatures in token of having received the same 
obtained on the office copy. In other words, when it is delivered in 
person, the signatures or thumb impression of the employee 
should be obtained on its duplicate copy. In case, he refuses to 
accept the charge-sheet, an endorsement to that effect should be 
made on it in the presence of two witnesses so that adequate proof 
of the same is available for evidence. Sometimes it also happens 
that when an employee is summoned personally in the presence 
of two or three witnesses by the competent authority to receive the 
charge-sheet and he receives it but refuses to sign or put his thumb 
impression on the office copy in token of having received the 
same, an endorsement to that effect must be made by the 
competent authority on the office copy of the charge-sheet and 
such an endorsement should be witnessed by atleast two 
witnesses. But when an employee insists on a copy of the charge- 
sheet being made out in Hindi or in any other regional language 
this should be done though it is not obligatory to translate it in the 
mother-tongue of the employee unless such a language is declared 
as the official language of the State in which he is employed. 
POWER TO SUSPEND PENDING ENQUIRY 
It is now well settled that the power to suspend, in the sense of 
right to forbid a servant to work, is not an implied term in an 
ordinary contract between the master and servant. Such power 
can only be the creature either of a statute governing the contract 
or of an express term in the contract itself. Ordinarily, therefore, 
the absence of such power either as an express term in the contract 


278 Labour Laws 
or in the rules framed under some statute would mean that the 
employer would have no power to suspend a workman and even 
if he does so in the sense that he forbids the employee to work, he 
will have to pay wages during the so called period of suspension. 
Generally where there are ‘Standing Orders’ there is a 
provision in such standing orders for payment of subsistence 
allowance to the suspended workman. For instance, Model 
Standing Orders 14(4) in Schedule I to the Industrial Employment 
(Standing Orders) Rules, 1946, framed under Industrial 
Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946, makes such provision. 
PROCEDURE TO CONDUCT A DOMESTIC ENQUIRY 
The procedure to be followed in a domestic enquiry 
proceedings, is also not prescribed anywhere. Enquiry, of course, 
should be in conformity with rules of natural justice. What is 
natural justice is also not very clear, it has to be understood in the 
context of various case-laws. Before the start of domestic enquiry 
the date and place of the domestic enquiry should be 
communicated to the employee clearly. What should be the 
preferable procedure is beautifully delineated by Gajendragadkar, 
J. It is necessary to emphasise that in the domestic enquiries the 
employer should take steps first to lead evidence against the 
workman charged, give an opportunity to the workman to cross- 
examine the said evidence and then should the workman be asked 
whether he wants to give any explanation about the evidence led 
against him. Such procedure should be usually followed. When 
the charges are based on material on record and is accepted by the 
delinquent workman strict adherence to this procedure is not 
necessary. Witnesses should normally be examined in the 
presence of the employee in respect of the charges if statements 
taken previously and given by witnesses are relied on, they 
should be made available to the workman concerned. The 
workman should be given a fair opportunity to cross-examine 
witnesses. He should be given a fair opportunity to examine 
witnesses including himself in support of his defence and the 
enquiry officer should record his findings, based upon the 
evidence so adduced. The principles of natural justice in their 
journey through centuries have shed much of their glories and are 
now crystallised into four principles of justice— 
(a) opportunity to both the contesting parties to be heard; 


Other Related Matters 279 
(b) hearing before an impartial enquiry officer so that no man 
can be judge of his own cause; 
(c) decision made in good faith; and 
(d) an orderly course of procedure. 
REPORT OF THE ENQUIRY OFFICER 
When the domestic enquiry is complete, the stage of submitting 
the report follows. This report is a very important document. Often 
this report comes to the scrutiny of the court and so it should be 
carefully written. Though inquiry proceedings before a domestic 
officer are not judicial or quasi-judicial reasons are not required to 
be stated out elaborately. It is always prudent that some brief 
reasons should be given in support of the findings. Report and 
findings should only be based on evidence adduced before 
enquiry officer and the material brought before it in support of the 
charges contained in charge-sheet. No extraneous considerations 
should come into play when enquiry officer comes to the 
conclusion or while writing the report. Strictly speaking, the 
enquiry officer is not entitled to bring in facts in his report which 
did not form part of the evidence. What type of punishment is to 
be given is entirely within management's discretion. An enquiry 
report, therefore, is a must after the domestic enquiry. If at the end 
of domestic enquiry the enquiry officer does not make a report, 
that itself introduces a serious infirmity in the enquiry and the 
Industrial Tribunal can in the case ignore the domestic enquiry 
and deal with the merits of the dispute for itself. It has been held 
by the Supreme Court in Electronics Corporation of India v. B. 
Karunakar, 1994 LLR 391, that submission of enquiry report to the 
delinquent employee will be imperative. 
PUNISHMENT 
For every misconduct punishment is a must. Any establishment 
or nation as a whole cannot progress without strict discipline in 
every walk of life. Industrial workers as a class form a small part 
of society and for smooth functioning of any industry and its 
progress discipline must be maintained at any cost. Now a days 
various theories of punishment are being propagated. It may be 
retributive, deterrent or reformative in character. Looking at the 
labour scene today, in the present context of economic affairs one 
cannot afford the luxury of reformative punishment and invite the 


280 Labour Laws 
trouble very often. Good human relationship should have some 
spine and firmness. It is always best to keep people under 
discipline. There should be no relaxing from the fundamental rule 
which must be enforced without fear and favour. It has been 
proved beyond doubt that employees will feel absolutely secure 
under the Iron-claw of discipline. The whole organisation is 
helped if you tell some trouble monger ‘to go to hell’ or even fire 
him, instead of trying to solve his inferiority complex, or 
compensate him for his wife’s unfaithfulness. There can be no 
quarrel with those who treat their employees as human beings 
with hopes and desires, fears and tribulations, their wants and 
needs, their strengths and weaknesses. But we are remodelling 
our employees and spelling them beyond repair, all in the name of 
good human relations. We have, therefore, our quarrel with those 
responsible for enforcement of discipline who try and appease 
disrespectful and indisciplined employees because they threaten 
to go up to the highest boss. This case of fear, which paralyses 
many good intentioned officers is bound to sap office discipline. 
This is bad human relations. Office discipline must be 
maintained, come what may and if this is done then whatever we 
wish to do fulfilling good objects of human relations such as 
philanthropy, kindness, humanitarianism all will automatically 
follow. People forget that human relation is not a cult to be blindly 
followed; it is rather a methodical way of thinking and working 
together, so as to achieve the best results. It does not mean putting 
a premium on indiscipline. It is a language of discipline which 
enables us to reach the hearts of our employees. It has got to be 
learnt, studied and applied everyday in all walks of life. 
Under the common law, punishment to be awarded was 
supposed to be entirely within the discretion of management. 
Under the Industrial Law also quantum of punishment to be 
awarded is the management's function to decide. Labour Court or 
Industrial Tribunal has no power to interfere with management's 
order, when the misconduct has been proved, except in a case 
where punishment is so disproportionate that a perversity can be 
inferred or punishment is to victimise an employee because of his 
union activity or other things. 
Position has now been changed after the enactment of section 
11A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 under which power is 
given to adjudicating authority to interfere with the quantum of 
punishment. 


Other Related Matters 281 
POINTS TO BE CONSIDERED BEFORE INFLICTING PUNISHMENT 
The termination of service of an employee for whatever reason, 
usually marks a critical moment in his life. Retirement can 
generate a deep sense of uselessness. Resignations can be filed 
with regret or bitterness, disciplinary termination means a social 
stigma as well as economic uncertainty. Retrenchment carries 
with it anxiety. Termination of service, particularly for the 
unskilled worker is usually catastrophe. The consequences both 
social and economic of the loss of employment can be so gross to 
him and his family that termination can be called social and 
economic capital punishment. In other countries, people can more 
easily from one job to another or find some relief in social security 
systems, but in India these facilities are not available. The 
implications for the Manager are obviously the greatest sensitivity 
to the consequences of an employee’s termination, the paramount 
need of the social justice, the avoidance of the slightest trace of 
arbitrariness or impulsiveness, and the necessity of written 
documentation of each step leading to any termination. When the 
question of termination arises, the following considerations are 
generally reflected:— 
(1) Human labour is not a commodity nor the employee a 
labour tool to be thrown away when his utility decreases. 
A new manager with the inefficient or an aging employee 
may need to recall the employee’s manager must 
somehow patiently bear the consequences of poor 
selection by his predecessors where, through no fault of 
the employee the wrong person was selected and poorly 
supervised others. 
(2) To a certain extent it can be said that the employee after 
years of service, acquires as it were property rights to a 
job. In a way similar to farmer acquiring land after 
cultivating it for many years, the post becomes his in a 
way that it is nobody else’s. 
Because of the gravity of the consequences of termination, the 
possibilities of retaining, transfer, or placement in another post 
should be explored. 


282 Labour Laws 
RESIGNATION OF AN EMPLOYEE AND LEGAL IMPLICATIONS 
‘Resignation’, in the dictionary sense, means the spontaneous 
relinquishment of one’s own right. This is conveyed by the maxim 
Resionatioiest juris propil spontanea refutatio (see Earl Jowitt’s 
Dictionary of English Law). In relation to an office, it connotes the 
act of giving up or relinquishing the office. To ‘relinquish an 
office’ means to “cease to hold” the office or to “lose hold of” the 
office (cf. Shorter Oxford Dictionary); and to “lose hold of office”, 
implies to “detach”, “unfasten”, “undo or un-tie the binding knot 
or link” which holds one to the office and the obligations and 
privileges that go with it. In the general juristic sense also, the 
meaning of “resigning office” is not different. There also, as a rule, 
both, the intention to give up or relinquish the office and the 
concomitant act of its relinquishment, are necessary to constitute a 
complete and operative resignation (see American Jurisprudence, 
Second Edn. Vol. 15A, page 80) although the act of relinquishment 
may take different forms or assume a unilateral or bilateral 
character, depending on the nature of the office and the conditions 
governing it. Thus, resigning office necessarily involves 
relinquishment of the office, which implies cessation or 
termination of, or cutting as under from the office. Indeed, the 
completion of the resignation and the vacation of the office, are the 
casual and effectual aspects of one and the same event. From the 
above discretion, it emerges that a complete and effective act of 
resigning office is, one which severs the link of the resignor with 
his office and terminates its tenure. 
Just as an employer can terminate the services of an employee, 
similarly, an employee can resign from service and in either case, 
nothing further is required to be done from both sides, because 
each side is sui juris and neither side is bound either to take or give 
service against its will. But it does not mean that an employee can 
snap the tie of service between himself and the employer by 
submitting his resignation the moment he wants to do so on the 
ground that he was entitled to do so at will just as an employer 
cannot force an employee to resign by coercion, undue influence, 
mis-representation, fraud, etc., or to dispense with his services 
contrary to the contract of service at his sweet will. In other words, 
resignation is a mode of putting an end of the contract of service 
by the employee like termination of service is the mode of putting 
an end by the employer and either of them does not require or 


Other Related Matters 283 
need consent or acceptance of the other. In fact, resignation is an 
offer by the employee to the employer to leave the service and does 
not amount to termination till it is accepted by the employer. It is, 
however, open to an employee to withdraw or revoke the offer till 
it is accepted, but such revocation or withdrawal is to be 
communicated prior to the acceptance of the resignation. The law 
requires notice on either side for the termination of service. When 
the employer wishes to terminate the services of an employee, the 
purpose of notice is to give him time and opportunity to find other 
employment, without depriving him of his earning during the 
time; and when the employee wishes to give up employment, the 
purpose is to give the employer time and opportunity to find a 
substitute. Thus, the employee on the one hand and the employer 
on the other has the right to have notice and as that right is for his 
benefit, he can waive it. The question has sometimes been raised 
as to what is the effect of an offer of resignation upon a service 
contract. The law is that an employee has the right to resign from 
the offer or expression of intention to resign before it is accepted by 
the master. Once the resignation is accepted, the relationship 
ends. But mere expression of a desire not to serve any longer, by 
itself, does not stop the servant from changing his mind to serve 
again. However, once it is accepted the servant cannot insist to 
have the contract continued. But an offer of resignation at a future 
date is always revocable. 
LAW RELATING TO RETIREMENT OF AN EMPLOYEE 
The word, “retire” has been defined in the Concise Oxford 
Dictionary as “cease from or give up office or profession or 
employment.” The meaning of the word, therefore, postulates a 
voluntary act on the part of the employee. In its use in the 
reflexive, the word “to retire’ would mean “to remove from 
service”. That would be a case of removal and not retirement, 
section 2(00) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 uses the words 
“voluntary retirement”. It follows that, unless the termination of 
the service is the result of a voluntary move on the part of the 
workman, he cannot be said to have “voluntarily retired”. A mere 
submission of the employee to the termination of service by the 
employer cannot be said to be a voluntary act of the former. This is 
particularly so in a case where the employer has the power under 
the terms of the employment to terminate the service, although 
such power has to be exercised after notice or on giving pay In lieu 


284 Labour Laws 
of notice. A voluntary retirement is the act of the employee, just as 
dismissal or removal from service is the act of the employer. 
Neither apathy nor submission on the part of a workman would 
alter the essential character of the termination of service of an 
employee. Retirement brings in the termination of employment or 
the contract of employment to an end. The definition of the term, 
‘retirement’ as given in section 2(00) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 1947 excludes from its purview the cases of voluntary 
retirement or retirement of the workman on reaching the age of 
superannuation, if the contract of employment between the 
employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in 
that behalf and termination of the service on the ground of 
continued ill-health as also termination of employment inflicted 
by way of punishment as a result of disciplinary action. 
Termination of service by way of retirement also amounts to 
retrenchment in certain circumstances. 
Retirement or superannuation is an event which comes more or 
less in an automatic process. An age is fixed on the reaching of 
which the holder of office has no option but to go out of office. 
There is no volition involved in that act. The employer and the 
employee have notice of the matter long before the event is to occur 
and the event is such that it cannot be arrested by either one of the 
them if the rule is to be followed. Therefore, the word “retirement” 
cannot be regarded as conclusive of the question whether 
termination of employment includes’ retirement and 
superannuation. Prior to 17-1-1983, there was no reference to 
retirement in the Standing Orders to be certified under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 1946 but now sub- 
clause (3) of clause 10B of the Industrial Employment (Standing 
Orders) Central Rules, 1946 provides for age of retirement. 
Notwithstanding that the age of retirement will not be automatic 
but will have to be incorporated in the certified standing orders if 
such a stipulation does not exist. 
CIRCUMSTANCES WHEN THERE IS NO AGE OF RETIREMENT 
EITHER IN THE APPOINTMENT LETTER OR CERTIFIED STANDING 
ORDERS 
It is now well established that in absence of any provision 
either in the certified standing orders, contract of employment, 
conditions of service, letters of appointment, or the service rules as 


Other Related Matters 285 
to the age of retirement, the workmen are entitled to work so long 
as they are physically and mentally fit to discharge their duties 
efficiently and diligently. It is also equally well-established that in 
the absence of any rule or standing order fixing the age of 
retirement, a workman cannot claim his appointment as one for 
life if otherwise he has become incompetent to discharge his 
duties efficiently and diligently, In cases, where such an age is 
fixed in some contract, it is the age so fixed in the contract which 
is the age of retirement and on the attainment of which an 
employee can be made to retire. If there is no contract but such an 
age has been fixed in the conditions of service or the terms of the 
appointment letter, it is that age which is the age, on the 
attainment of which the employee will be said to have reached the 
age of retirement. At the same time, it does not mean that in the 
absence of such a provision either in the appointment letter, 
service rule, standing order, an employee can be retired at any 
time. On the contrary, till the time an employee is physically and 
mentally fit to discharge his duties efficiently, he cannot be retired 
in the absence of such a provision in the contract of service. 
PRINCIPLES FOR FIXING THE AGE OF RETIREMENT 
The general considerations which should weigh with the 
industrial adjudication while determining or fixing the age of 
retirement in industrial employments are : 
(a) what is the nature of the work assigned to the employees 
in the course of their employment; 
(b) what is the nature of the wage-structure paid to them; 
(c) what are the retirement benefits and other amenities 
available to them; 
(d) what is the character of the climate where the employees 
work and what is the age of retirement fixed in 
comparable industries in the same region; and 
(e) what is generally the practice prevailing in the industry 
in the region in the matter of retiring its employees. These 
and other relevant facts have to be weighed by the 
Tribunal in every case when it is called upon to fix the age 
of retirement in an industrial dispute. 
However, in the case of an all India concern, it would be 
advisable to have uniform conditions of service throughout India 


286 Labour Laws 
and if uniform conditions prevail in any such concern, they 
should not be lightly changed. At the same time, it cannot also be 
forgotten that industrial adjudication is based, in this country at 
least, on what is known as the industry-cum-region basis and 
cases may arise where the conditions of service of an all India 
concern, are uniform. Besides, however, desirable may be in the 
case of an all-India concern, the industrial adjudication cannot 
abstain from seeing that fair conditions of service prevailing in the 
industry with which it is concerned. If, therefore, any scheme, 
which may be uniformly in force throughout India in the case of 
an all-India concern, appears to be unfair and not in accordance 
with prevailing conditions, in such matters, it would be the duty 
of the tribunal to make changes in the scheme to make it fair and 
bring it into line with the prevailing conditions, in such matters, 
particularly in the region in which the tribunal is functioning. But 
where an employer adopts a fair and reasonable pension scheme 
that would play an important part in fixing the age of retirement 
at a comparatively earlier stage. 
RETIRAL BENEFITS TO EMPLOYEES IN PRIVATE EMPLOYMENT 
Retirement or death is not a possibility but a certainty. Both 
have similarity with a stark dissimilarity. While the date of 
retirement is known to a person, the day he joins duty the death is 
mysteriously uncertain. Retirement is a contingency that is sure to 
happen sooner or later, and against which the individual of small 
means cannot effectively provide honourable sustenance by his 
own ability or foresight alone or even in private combination with 
his fellows. Our Constitution, therefore, has affirmed to all such 
individuals of small means the right to standard of living, 
adequate care for the health and well being of their own and of 
their families, including food, clothing, housing, and medical care 
and necessary social services and the right to security in the event 
of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age, or 
circumstances beyond their control, by enacting various 
legislations like Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952, Family Pension Scheme, Employees’ State 
Insurance Act, 1948, Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, etc. A brief 
information is being given below about the retiral benefits. 
(i) Gratuity.—Gratuity is also a kind of retirement benefit like 
the provident fund or pension. Gratuity paid to workmen is 


Other Related Matters 287 
intended to help them after retirement, whether the retirement is 
the result of the rules of superannuation or physical disability. 
The general principle underlying such schemes is that by their 
length of service workmen are entitled to claim a certain amount 
as a retiral benefit. 
For purposes of gratuity ‘retirement’ has been defined in 
section 2(q) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 to mean 
termination of service of an employee otherwise than on 
superannuation. According to that definition, all cases of 
termination of service will fall within the ambit of the expression, 
‘retirement’. The Payment of Gratuity Act makes no distinction in 
cases of retirement or voluntary resignation in prescribing the 
qualifying number of years. In other words, a person who resigns 
his services or retires after putting in continuous service for five 
years, becomes entitled to payment of gratuity under the Act 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (6) of section 4. As soon as 
the services of an employee are terminated on his being so 
superannuated, gratuity becomes payable to him. Gratuity is also 
payable to a person whose services are terminated on account of 
his death or disablement due to accident or disease. Thus on 
retirement, superannuation or termination due to disablement or 
on resignation, an employee is entitled to get gratuity at the rate of 
fifteen days’ wages calculated on the basis of the rate of wages last 
drawn by him for every completed year of service. For the 
purposes of the calculation, his wages will consist of the basic- 
wage plus dearness allowance and any bonus, commission, 
house rent allowance, overtime wages and any other allowances if 
being paid or payable to the employee will not be taken into 
account for the purposes of computing gratuity. 
It is pertinent to clarify the position with regard to calculation 
of gratuity for an employee having served for 20 years and 
drawing salary of Rs. 2,600 per month will be as under: 
“Rs. 2,600 per month last drawn salary Rs. 100 per day x 15 
days x 20 Yr. of service — Rs. 30,000 gratuity payable.” 
The Payment of Gratuity Act has been amended by an 
Amending Act 34 of 1994 w.e.f. 24-5-1994 whereby the maximum 
gratuity has been fixed at Rs. 1,00,000. 
(ii) Provident Fund, Deposit Link Insurance.—(a) Provident 
Fund is one of the basic social security measures which fulfils the 


288 Labour Laws 
functions of restoration of the essential income of a worker to some 
extent after retirement. The Indian Parliament created a fund 
under the Employees’ Provident Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952 for the benefit of the toiling masses to provide 
them to fall back upon in times of hardship viz death, retirement, 
infirmity and sickness when a person is not able to earn his bread 
by sweat of his brow. The corpus of this fund is created by the 
contribution by an eligible employee, fixed under the Act together 
with equal amount by the employer. This amount is invested and 
the interest earned thereupon is also credited to the amount of the 
member on pro-rata basis. When the member leaves the service/ 
retires or dies while in service, some more benefits accure to them. 
In case of retirement the total amount which had been credited to 
his account by way of his contribution together with the equal 
amount contributed by the employer with upto date interest at the 
rate declared by the Provident Fund authorities from time to time 
is paid to him. The position of Private Provident Fund is mote or 
less the same. 
In case of death there is minimum guarantee, i.e., Rs. 3,500 is 
assured to the member irrespective of the amount standing to his 
credit in his account of Provident Fund, i.e., the amount that falls 
short will be paid from the Provident Fund itself. In case it is more 
than that the full amount is paid to the survivors of the deceased. 
Employees’ Pension Scheme 
A member can receive pension after putting in 10 years of 
eligible service. This period of minimum service is not applicable 
in the case of Widow’s Pension/Disablement Pension/Children’s 
Pension/ Orphan’s Pension. 
The Widow’s Pension, Children’s Pension and Orphan’s 
Pension is payable after only 30 days of actual contribution. 
A member can opt for discounted/reduced pension before the 
age of 58 but not earlier than 50 years. 
If a member opts for reduced pension his/her nominee or the 
widow/widower can get benefit of capital return equal to 100 
times of monthly pension is lump-sum along with pension. 
Provision for nomination in the absence of the member’s family 
is made. 
The option is also available to become a member of the 
Employees’ Pension Scheme, 1995 w.e.f. 1-4-1993 under certain 
conditions. 


Other Related Matters 289 
On completing 33 years of pensionable service, the pension 
entitlement shall be 50% of the members’ pay at the time of 
retirement. 
60% entitlement of pay on completion of 40 years’ pensionable 
service. 
Family pension cover for widow/widower for life or until her 
remarriage, and to two children upto 25 years of age, upon death 
of the member, be it in service, out of service or after receiving the 
pension on retirement. 
To further improve upon the benefits there is provision for 
valuation every three years by the Actuary. 
(iii) Medical care to the insured person and his spouse who 
has ceased to be in insurable employment on account of 
superannuation.—The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 is a 
piece of social security legislation enacted to provide for certain 
benefits including medical care to the employees in factories, 
certain shops and establishments. The Law has been amended in 
1989 by adding Rules 60 and 61 to the Employees’ State Insurance 
(Central) Rules, 1950 inter alia providing that insured persons 
who cease to be in insurable employment on attaining the age of 
superannuation are eligible to receive medical benefits under the 
Act for themselves and their spouses. These Rules have come into 
force with effect from 1st February, 1991 by a Memorandum 
No.N.1 1/13/91-Ins-II dated 3-7-1991 and Rule 61 reads as under: 
61. Medical benefits to retired insured persons: An insured person 
who leaves the insurable employment on attaining the age of 
superannuation after being insured for not less than five years, 
shall be eligible to receive medical benefits for himself and his 
spouse at the scale prescribed under the Act and the regulations 
made thereunder, subject to— 
(i) the production of proof of his superannuation and having 
been in the insurable employment for a minimum of five 
years to the satisfaction of such office as may be 
authorised by the Corporation; and 
(ii) the payment of contribution at the rate of ten rupees per 
month in lump sum for one year at a time in advance to 
the concerned office of the Corporation in the manner 
prescribed by it. 


290 Labour Laws 
The Regional Directors have been advised to take immediate 
steps to provide medical benefits to these insured persons 
following the procedure laid down in Employees’ State Insurance 
Act, 1948 Employees State Insurance (Central) Rules, 1950 and 
Employers’ State Insurance (General) Regulations, 1950 along- 
with the instructions contained in the aforesaid Memorandum. 
Powers have been delegated by the Director General upon the 
Regional Director/Jt. Regional Director/Dy. Regional Director 
and the Local Office Managers vide orders dated 1-7-1991 to 
decide the title of the insured persons and their spouses for 
eligibility to receive medical benefits under the Rules. However, 
the following procedure may be followed for providing medical 
benefit:— 
The insured person who desires to avail medical benefit shall 
submit an application to the local office Manager in the prescribed 
form alongwith a certificate/declaration from the employer in a 
prescribed form. 
The Local Office Manager shall examine the application 
alongwith the enclosed documents with reference to the records 
maintained in the local office and shall satisfy himself that the 
insured person is eligible to receive medical benefit. After 
satisfying himself about the title of the insured person, the Local 
Office Manager shall record his order on the form prescribed on 
the reverse of the application. Also a certificate from the employer 
in prescribed form and a declaration by the insured person if 
corroborated by the records of the local office also shall be 
considered as a sufficient proof of his title for eligibility to the said 
benefit provided there is no evidence to the contrary. 
If the Local Office Manager certifies title of the insured person 
to the medical benefit, the insured person may be asked to deposit 
the contribution at the rate of Rs. 10/- per month in advance for 
one year with the Local Office. 
After the insured person has deposited the amount of 
prescribed contribution and receipt issued to him, he shall be 
issued a fresh Identity Card for himself and his spouse which 
shall be written/stamped on the top VALID UPTO ......”. A new 
MRE shall also be prepared which shall also be written/stamped 
VALID UPTO.....”. The period of validation shall be the same for 
which the insured person has paid the contribution. The MRE, as 


Other Related Matters 291 
prepared shall be sent to the IMO Incharge of the concerned 
dispensary under ESIC 48-A. 
(iv) Retrenchment Compensation.—Section 2(00) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 defining retrenchment incorporates 
the words, “voluntary retirement”. It follows that unless the 
termination of the service is the result of a voluntary move on the 
part of the employee, he cannot be said to have “voluntarily 
retired”. A voluntary retirement is the act of the employee just as 
the dismissal or removal from service is the act of the employer. 
Therefore in the absence of any terms of the contract of service 
providing for retirement of the employee on reaching a particular 
age or in the absence of any standing orders having statutory 
sanction regarding the age of superannuation, the termination of 
service of a workman on his reaching a particular age would not 
fall within exception (b) to section 2(00) of the Act. Since 
retirement in the absence of any stipulation as to such age in the 
contract of service is termination of service within the meaning of 
section 2(00) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and since such 
termination, on notice in accordance with the contract of service, 
will amount to ‘retrenchment’. The employee will have to fulfil the 
requirements of section 25F of the Act. In other words, in the 
absence of any rule or contract of service as to age of retirement, 
the retirement of an employee for any reason including that he is 
beyond a particular age is termination of service and not the 
enforcement of any rule of superannuation and on such. 
termination the employee is also entitled to notice and 
retrenchment compensation in accordance with the provisions of 
section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. 
(v) Encashment of Earned Leave.—Section 79 of the Factories 
Act, 1948 provides that if a worker is discharged or dismissed 
from service or quits his employment or is superannuated or dies 
while in service, during the course of the calendar year, he or his 
heirs or nominee, as the case may be, shall be entitled to wages in 
lieu of the quantum of leave to which he was entitled immediately 
before his discharge, dismissal, quitting of employment, 
superannuation or death calculated at the rates specified in sub- 
section (1), even if he had not worked for the entire period 
specified in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) making him eligible 
to avail of such leave, and such payment shall be made to him 
where the worker is superannuated or dies while in service, before 


292 Labour Laws 
the expiry of two months from the date of such superannuation or 
death. 
It is pertinent to refer to sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 79 of 
the Factories Act which provide as under: 
“() 
(2) Every worker who has worked for a period of 240 days or 
more in a factory during a calendar year shall be allowed 
during the subsequent calendar year leave with wages for 
a number of days calculated at the rate of— 
(i) if an adult, one day for every twenty days of work 
performed by him during the previous calendar year; 
(ii) if a child, one day for every fifteen days of work 
performed by him during the previous calendar year. 
Explanation 1.—For the purpose of this sub-section— 
(a) any days of lay-off, by agreement or contract or as 
permissible under the standing orders; 
(b) in the case of a female worker, maternity leave for any 
number of days not exceeding twelve weeks; and 
(c) the leave earned in the year prior to that in which the 
leave is enjoyed, 
shall be deemed to be days on which the worker has 
worked in a factory for the purpose of computation of the 
period of 240 days or more, but he shall not earn leave for 
these days. 
Explanation 2.—The leave admissible under this sub- 
section shall be exclusive of all holidays whether 
occurring during or at either end of the period of leave. 
A worker whose service commences otherwise than on 
the first day of January shall be entitled to leave with 
wages at the rate laid down in clause (i) or, as the case 
may be, clause (ii) of sub-section (1) if he has worked for 
two-thirds of the total number of days in the remainder of 
the calendar year.” 


SUBJECT INDEX A 
Absence 
pregnancy, 155 
Accident 
Factories Act, 1948, special 
provisions, 95 
fatal, 252 
notice of, 166 
Accident book 
ESI, Act, 1948, 58 
Accounting year 
bonus, 198 
Ad hoc allowance 
bonus, 203 
Adjudication 
dispute, ID Act, 1947, 110 
Adult workers 
working hours under Factories 
Act, 1948, 90 
Age 
particulars of, 59 
report to local office or medical 
officer, 58 
retirement 284 
Allocable susmins 
bonus, Pe 
Annual leave 
wages, 93, 191 
Apprentier 
bonus, 7 
contract of, 3,5 
ESL, 7 
graduate, 6 
hours of work, 7 
hours per day, 7 not governed by labour laws, 5 
not workman, 5 
obligation of employer, 6 
obligation of employee, to 
accept employment, 5 
provident fund, 7 
regular post, claim for, 5 
skilled craftsman, 6 
stipend, 10 
technician, 6 
termination of, 9, 10 
trade apprentice, 6 
training, 6 
training, period of, 3 
violation under Apprentices 
Act by employer, 9 
Apprentices Act, 1961 
amendment in, 2 
appearances rules, 
amendment, 3 
objects of, 2 
penalties, 11 
Appropriate government 
Contract Labour (Regulation 
and Abolition) Act, 1976, 19 
Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959, 68 
Arbitration 
dispute, 112 
Available surplus 
bonus, 199 
B 
Badli workman 
293 ID Act, 1947, 119, 128 


294 Labour Laws 
Benefits 
scheme under, Employees’ 
Provident Funds and 
Miscellaneous Provisions 
Act, 1952, 47 
Bonded labour 
agreement, custom, etc., 15 
free from mortgage, 15 
freed, 15 
homestead, 15 
liability, extinguishing of, 15 
property of, 15 
Bonded Labour System 
(Abolition) Act, 1976 
object, 14 
overriding effect, 14 
punishment, 16 
Bonus 
accounting year, 198 
allocable surplus, 198 
apprentice, 7 
available surplus, 199 
balance sheet, accuracy of, 201 
city compensatory allowance, 
203 
dearness allowance, 202 
definition of employee, 194 
eligibility for, 194, 195 
exempted establishment, 197 
family allowance, 203 
forfeiture, 202 
gross profit, 199 
infancy benefit, 195 
medical, 154 
new establishment, 195 
number of persons, 196 
off season, 203 
on commission, 202 Payment of Bonus Act, 1994, 
194 
profit and loss account, 
accuracy of, 201 
public undertaking, 196 
retaining allowance, 203 
subsistence allowance, 203 
uniform and chappal, value of, 
203 
wages, 202 
working days, 194, 195 
year, 200 
J 
Certifying surgeon 
Factories Act, 1948, 86 
Charge sheet 
Criminal Procedure Code, 
1973, 273 
memorandum, of, 273 
service of, 277 
Child Labour (Prohibition and 
Regulation) Act, 1986 
notice, display of, 34 
object of, 32 
penalties under, 33 
register under, 33 
City compensatory allowance 
bonus, 203 
Closure 
compensation, 122, 123, 124 
control on, 126 
fundamental right, 123 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1948, 
103 
Clubs 
profit motive, absence of, 103 
Compensation 
closure, 122, 123, 124 


Subject Index 
distribution of, 250 
lay off, bonus, 203 
liability of employer, 241 
return, 253 
quantum of, lay off, 118 
retrenchment, 120, 121 
Contract labour 
Employees’ State Insurance 
Act, 1948, reference of, 25 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
reference of, 26 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, 
reference of, 25 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936, 
reference of, 25 
Contract Labour (Regulation and 
Abolition) Act, 1970 
applicability of, 18 
Factories Act, applicability of, 
24 
licence for contractor, 20 
object, 18 
Contract Labour (Regulation and 
Abolition) Act, 1976 
appropriate Government, 19, 
contract labour, absorption of, 
ps 
contract labour, prohibition of, 
21 
contract labour, wages to, 23 
penalties, 25 
principal employer, liabilities 
of, 24 
registers, records and returns, 
26 
Contribution 
by two or more employers, 57 
card, 40, 44, 45, 55 
damage, levy of, 37 295 
damages, delayed, 37, 38 
interest on, 56 
punishment for, failure to pay, 
64 
rate of, 56 
returns and forms, 43 
under ESI Act, 1948, 53 
workman, 19 
Craftsman 
skilled, 6 
Creditor 
extinguishing debt, 16 
D 
Damage 
recovery of, 65, 66 
Dearness allowance 
bonus, 202 
Death 
by employment injury, 59 
compensation, 247 
insured person, 59 
Debt 
extinguishing debt, 16 
Declaration 
by person taking employment, 
39, 40 
Form under ESI Act, 1948, 53, 
54 
Deposit linked insurance 
provident fund, 287 
Disablement 
partial, meaning of, 240 
total, 247 
Dispute 
workman, 135 
Domestic enquiry 
procedure for, 278 


296 
E 
Earned leave 
encashment of, 291 
Enquiry 
domestic, 278 
officer, power of, 279 
pending, 277 
Employee 
definition of, 7 
Employees’ Provident Funds 
and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952, 
meaning of, 25, 194 
register of, ESI Act, 1952, 56 
registration, 282 
retirement to, 283 
transfer of, 267 
Employees’ Provident Funds and 
Miscelianeous Provisions Act, 
1952 
applicability of, 36 
benefit scheme, 47 
contribution, 37, 38, 39, 43, 44, 
45 
contribution card, 40, 44 
damages, delayed contribution, 
37, 38 
Employees’ Pension Scheme, 
42 
inspector, 45 
object of, 36 
particulars of ownership 
employer to furnish, 41 
punishments, 47 
wages, 38 
Employees State Insurance Act, 
1948 
abstention of insured, 57 
accident book, 58 Labour Laws 
accident, report to nearest local 
office, 58 
certificate of employment, 55 
contribution, 53 
contribution by two or more 
employers, 57 
contribution rate on leaving of 
employment, 56 
death by employment injury, 
59 
declaration form, duty to be 
complete by employer, 53 
factories, registration of, 53 
family, registration of, 54, 55 
first aid, 59 
forms and returns, 62 
identity card of employees, 55 
insurance number, allotment 
of, 54 
object of, 52 
punishment for failure to pay 
contribution, 64 
punishment for false 
statement, 65 
punitive action during sickness, 
60 
recovery of damage, 65, 66 
registration of employees, 56 
scheme by joint employers, 57 
Employer 
duty of, gratuity, 210 
duty of, lay off, 117 
Employees’ Pension Scheme, 
42 
identity card of employee, 55 
joint employer, scheme, 57 
meaning of, 150 
obligation of apprentice to 
accept employment, 5 


Subject Index 
obligation of, Factories Act, 
1948, 85 
obligation of, wage, 218 
obligation towards apprentice, 
6 
obligation, Minimum Wages 
Act, 1948, 179 
particulars of ownership, 41 
_recovery of money, 143 
retrenchment, ID Act, 1947, 121 
returns under EPF Act, 1952, 46 
right of, lay off, 117 
violation of, Apprentice Act, 9 
Employers’ Liability Act, 1938 
common employment, 74 
contract of service, prohibition 
of, 75 
object of, 74 
personal injury, 74 
Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959 
appropriate Government, 68 
notification of vacancies, 70, 71 
object of, 68 
offence and penalties, 70 
return, 72 
Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 
definitions, 78 
object, 78 
penalties, 80 
registers, 80 
remuneration, meaning of, 78 
Establishment 
Contract Labour (Regulation 
and Abolition) Act, 1976, 19 
exempted, 197 
new, bonus, 195 
profit motive, 103 seasonal, 209 
small, 150 
F 
Factory 
occupier, duties of, 86 
Factories Act, 1948 
adults, working hours, 90 
annual leave with wages, 93 
applicability, 84 
certifying surgeon, 86 
hazardous process, 87 
health, 86 
inspecting staff, 86 
object of, 84 7 
obligation of employer, 85 
penalties, 97 
registers, notices etc., 96 
safety, 87 
special provisions, 95 
welfare, 89 
young persons, working 
hours, 92 
Family 
registration of, 54 
Family allowance 
bonus, 203 
Fatal accident 
deposit, 253 
injury, 252 
Workmen’s Compensation 
Act, 1923, 252 
G 
Gratuity 
actually worked, meaning of, 
207 
allotment, 208 
average monthly wages, 208 297 


298 
calculation of, average wage, 
208 
continuous service, 208 
display of notice, 212 
duty of employer, 210 
eligibility, 209, 210 
forfeiture of, 211 
legal heir, 208 
limit, 211 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, 
206 
H 
Hazardous process 
Factories Act, 1948, 87 
Health 
Factories Act, 1948, 86 
hours of work, 258 
Holiday 
casual leave, 7 
leave, 260, 261 
Minimum Rate of Wages Act, 
1948, 178 
Hours of work 
efficiency of worker, 258 
Mines Act, 1952, 161 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, 178 
Motor Transport Workers Act, 
1961, 189 
notice, 190 
spread over, 189 
I 
Industrial dispute 
arbitration, 112 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
104, 105 
settlement of, 105, 107 Labour Laws 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
60 days’ notice to close 
undertaking, 125 
adjudication of dispute, 110 
Amendment Act of 1965, 119 
arbitration, 112 
authorities under, 107 
badli workman, 119, 128 
board of conciliation, 108 
closure, 122, 123, 124, 126 
conciliation, 104, 105 
definitions, 103 
dispute, 104, 105, 107, 110 
labour court, 109 
lay off, 117, 126, 127 
monthly wages, 139 
notice of change, 109 
object, 102 
penalties, 115, 145 
protected workman, 137 
recovery of money from 
employer, 144 
retrenchment, 120, 121, 126 
standing orders, 138 
strike, 105, 113, 114, 115, 116 
transfer of undertaking, 122 
tribunal, 108, 109, 136 
unfair labour practice, 123 
Industrial tribunal 
ID Act, 1947, 108, 109, 136 
Infant 
bonus, infancy, benefit, 195 
Injury 
death by employment injury, 
59 
fatal accident, 252 
personal, 74 


Subject Index 
Inspector 
Factories Act, 1948, 86 
penalty for obstructing, 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, 
158 
under EPF and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952, 45 
Insured person 
abstention of, 57 
death of, 59 
Interest 
on contribution, ESI Act, 1948, 
56 
L 
Labour court 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
109 
Lay off 
bonus, 203 
compensation, 118 
control on, 126 
duration of, 117 
duty of employer, 117 
law, 117 
right of employer, 117 
Leave 
12 days, limit of, 7 
admissibility of, 292 
application for leave, 265 
as a right, claim of, 264 
availability, 263 
calculation of, 262 
casual, 7 
dismissed worker, 262 
earned leave, 191 
encashment of earned leave, 
291 
entitlement to, 261 299 
excess, 8 
extraordinary, 8 
Factories Act, 1948, 261 
holidays, 260, 261 
illness, 155 
medical, 8 
miscarriage, 154 
obligation of employer, 265 
period, 191 
sickness, 266 
unavailed termination, 264 
with wages under Mines Act, 
1952, 162 
Lock-out 
continuation of, 116 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
1135, 114,415 
M 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 
applicability of, 148 
definitions, 149 
maternity benefit, 151, 153, 154 
miscarriage, 150, 154 
nursing break, 155 
object, 148 
penalty, 157, 158 
pregnancy, 154 
prohibition of women 
workman, 151 
wages, 149, 156 
women, 149 
Medical certificate 
sickness, 266 
superannuation, 289 
Mines Act, 1952 
18 years of age, prohibition of 
employment, 167 
accident, 166 


300 
falsification of records, 170 
health and safety of workers, 
164 
hours of work, 161 
object, 160 
penalty, 169, 171, 173 
responsibilities of owner, 163 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 
employer's obligation, 179 
extra wage, 179 
holidays, 178 
hours of work, 178 
minimum rates of wages, 177 
object, 176 
rate of wages, 177, 178 
registers, records, etc., 182 
rest day, 179 
Misconduct 
faulty duty of, 269 
punishment, 279, 281 
Motor Transport Workers Act, 
1961 
applicability of, 186 
exemptions, 187 
hours of work, 189 
medical and first aid facilities, 
188 
object of, 186 
obligation of employer, 192 
penalties, 192 
undertaking, 186 
weekly rest, 189 
welfare facilities, 188 
workers, 187 
young person, employment of, 
190 Labour Laws 
N 
Notice 
60 days’ notice, closure, 125 
display of, under Child Labour 
(Prohibition and Regulation) 
Act, 1986, 34 
gratuity, 212 
hours of work, 190 
notification of vacancy, 70 
- Notice of change 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
109 
O 
Occupier 
duties of, 86 
Off season 
bonus, 203 
Office bearer 
Trade Unions Act, 1926, 229 
Overtime 
Minimum Wages Act, 1948, 179 
Mines Act, 1952, 161 
Owner 
responsibilities of, Mines Act, 
163 
5 
Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 
accounting year, 198 
allocable surplus, 198 
application of Act, 195, 196 
available surplus, 199 
eligibility for, 194, 195 
exempted establishment, 197 
wages for bonus, chart of, 203 
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 
actually worked, meaning of, 
207 


Subject Index 301 
continuous service, 208 Pregnancy 
eligibility, 209, 210 termination of, 154 
forfeiture of gratuity, 211 Principal employer 
legal heir, 208 Contract Labour (Regulation 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 and Abolition) Act, 1976, 20, 
applicability of the Act, 214 24 
deductions, 217, 218 Workmen’s Compensation 
Act, 1923, reference of, 26 object of, 214 
penalty, 220 erent ; 
wages, 215, 216 gro8s prodt bonus, 199 
Penalty Profit motive 
Child Labour (Prohibition and aes ate 
Regulation) Act, 1986, 33 establishment, 103 
Contract Labour (Regulation Provident fund 
and Abolition) Act, 1976, 24 contribution, 37, 38, 39 
Employment Exchange deposit linked insurance, 287 
(Compulsory Notification of withdrawal by employee, 46 
Vacancies) Act, 1959, 70 Punishment 
Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, inflicting, 281 
80 misconduct, 279 
Factories Act, 1948, 97 modification of, Industrial 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1948, Disputes Act, 1947, 109 
115, 145 
instigation, 115 Q 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, Quantum 
157, 158 lay-off compensation, 118 
Mines Act, 1952, 169, 171 
Motor Transport Workers Act, ; 
1961, 192 Remuneration R 
meaning of, Equal WwW Act; 1936, Payment of Wages Act, Remuneration Act, 1976, 78 220 
Punishment under EPF Resignation 
(Miscellaneous Provisions) employee, 282 
Act, 1952, 47, 48, 49 Retirement 
punishment for, false age, 284, 285 
statement, 64 benefit, 286 
Workmen’s Compensation gratuity, 287 
Act, 1923, 248, 255 law relating to, 283 
Pension private employment, 286 
Employees’ Pension Scheme, standing order, 289 
40, 41 


302 Labour Laws 
Return 
ESI Act, 1948, 62 
Retrenchment 
compensation, 120, 121 
conditions, 120, 121 
control of, 126 
S 
Safety 
Factories Act, 1948, 87 
of workers, 164 
workers’ participation, 89 
Salesman 
bonus, commission to, 203 
Sales Promotion Employees 
Conditions of Service Act, 
1976 
appointment, 223 
definitions, 223, 227 
maintenance of registers, 224 
object, 222 
Seasonal establishment 
gratuity, 209 
Shops and Establishment Act of 
States 
hours of work, rest, spread 
over, etc., 259 
Sickness 
medical certificate, 266 
punitive action, 60 
Spreadover 
hours of work, 189 
Standing Order 
age of retirement, 284, 285 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
138 
Stipend 
apprentice, 10 Strike 
continuation of, 116 
go-slow, 106 
illegal, 113, 115 
ingredients of, 105 
lock-outs, 113, 114, 115 
meaning of, 105 
prohibition of, 113, 114, 115 
Subsistence allowance 
bonus, 203 
Superannuation 
medical claim, 289 
7 
Termination 
unavailed leave, 264 
Trade Unions Act, 1926 
civil suit, 233 
criminal conspiracy, 233 
definitions, 229 
prescribed form, 235 
registered office of trade union, 
232 
registration of certificates, 232 
registration of trade union, 229, 
230, 235 
returns, 233, 234 
trade union rules, 231 
Transfer 
of employee, 267 
U 
Unavailed leave 
termination, 264 
Unfair labour practice 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
jB 
Uniform and chappal 
bonus, value of, 203 


Subject Index 303 
Vv 
Vacancy 
Employment Exchanges 
(Compulsory Notification of 
Vacancies) Act, 1959, 69 
employment having 
remuneration below 60 
rupees, 69 
notification of, 70, 71 
promotion, 69 
surplus staff, 69 
Ww 
Wage 
annual leave with, 191, 
average wage, 208 
bonus, 202 
cash payment, 177 
claim, 218 
deductions, 217, 218 e? 
extra wage, 179, 190 
fine, 218 
leave period, 191 
_ leave with, 162 
mandatory condition, 139 
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961, 156 
meaning of, 149 
minimum rates, 177, 178 
obligations of employer, 218 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936, 
214, 215, 216, 249 
reckoning wage, ESI Act, 1948, 
57 
responsibility, 216 
two or more employers, 57 
under Employees’ Provident 
Funds and Miscellaneous 
Provisions Act, 1952, 38 Weekly rest day 
Motor Transport Workers Act, 
1961, 189 
Welfare 
Factories Act, 1948, 89 
Motor Transport Workers Act, 
1961, 188 
Women 
death of, maternity benefit, 154 
Women worker 
Equal Remuneration Act, 1976, 
79 
Worker 
dismissed, 262 
Factories Act, 1948, meaning 
of, 25 
health of, 164 
leave, 261 
right of, 89 
strike, 105 
women, 79 
Working hours 
8 hours per day, 7 
adults under Factories Act, 
1948, 90 
Workman 
badli workman, 119, 128 
compensation in case of 
closure, 124 
conditions of employment, 167 
Contract Labour (Regulation 
and Abolition) Act, 1976, 19 
meaning of, 106, 149 
off season, 203 
prohibition of work, 151 
protected, 137 
retrenchment, 129 
strike, 105 


304 Labour Laws 
women, prohibition of work, 
151 
Workmen’s Compensation 
Act, 1923, 239 
Workmen’s Compensation Act, 
1923 
calculation, 244, 245, 247 
death of employee, 247 
definitions, 238 
disablement, 240, 247 
employer's liability, 241 
fatal accident, 252 
object of, 238 
ot . mane 
Purchased 4 Axe hs 
Approval 4 
Gratis . 
: 
India University Library 
Bangalore- |p ce - lq sJ— 
| Nationar Law Schoo! of penalty, 248, 255 
registration of agreement, 254, 
255 
wages, 249 
Works committee 
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, 
107 
bd 
Young persons 
employment of, under 
Factories Act' 1948, 92 
Motor Transport Workers Act, 
1961, 190 
ts ‘ 


* 
4 r ¢ 
WX 
~ 


Classic Law Books 
from 
Gniversal 
with best compliments from 
UNIVERSAL LAW PUBLISHING CO. PVT. LTD. %, DELHI 
www.unilawbooks.com 


E at UNIVERSAL, through our concerted 
efforts, strive constantly to exceed the editorial 
excellence with ever widening experience and = 
dedicated work. As a company, we take great pride i in 
being innovative and progressive. We endeavour to 
bring to our readers the legal wisdom of our 
distinguished authors, legal luminaries, academicians, 
eminent members of jude: ane Pioae ractitioners | 
With preci¢ 
craftsmanshi 
to achieve n 
published, u 
about 150 
Intern 
U.S.A.,Aust 
being 
Indo-Ame 
The const 
excellenc 
Buildings 
Universa 
prof | 
To fin four 
WTA tT 
- 
< 


H.L. KUMAR 
LABOUR 
Ws Everybody 
Should Know 
There are certainly a number of books on labour laws, but none that is 
comprehensive enough to cover the whole gamut of labour laws in practice 
mode so as to enable the managers, leaders and workers to know, how the laws: 
concerning them exist and work in the real world. 
The knowledge of labour laws, is certainly a must for today’s managers, and 
lack of it might resolve into disastrous consequences. As labour laws mainly 
deal with the industries, their working knowledge is important for! 
management and workers alike, for the workers have to understand their day- | 
to-day problems in legal terms and the management has to understand those | 
problems and answer them effectively in accordance with the applicable laws | 
and within the prescribed legal framework. Industries, after all, play a major | 
role in the economy of a country and, so, a healthy and content work force | 
means a healthy economy. 
This book casts light on almost every issue concerning the labour laws that | 
have to be dealt with. The concepts and laws have been elucidated through | 
explanations based upon judicial interpretations. 
Culled from theoretical and practical experience of decades, this book will | 
serve as a beacon-light in understanding and solving the problems as well as in | 
establishing the good and harmonious employee-employer relationship. 
There has been consistent demand for a book that could help the managers in 3 
tackling the everyday problems. This book would be of great help to all those 
who grapple with labour laws in the field. | 
978-81-7534-6 
ill | 534680 chi — LEGAL ——— 3 
Law Publishing Co. Co. ©___ HANDBOOKS OR irintnetodks.< om Rs. 195 : | 
Universal proyeag 


